create but without bullshit it's very
important when you recreate you have no
bullshit
so it's Eric Weinstein not Weinstein
yeah I think it was originally vine
stain vine stain stain of Einstein yeah
German you know but ja it was we came
from a town between Edessa and kiev
called o'mine and that's where the
family though the vine stain family came
from we talked about how many people
mispronounce ya Weinstein
instead of Weinstein it's it's epidemic
and yet nobody ever says Albert Einstein
yes that's what yeah strange right that
is a weird one the Einstein is no sir
guy named Mike I know Mike Einstein no
no Einstein is there a guy like that you
remember the old I was Blazing Saddles
of sure Mel Brooks yeah Mel Brooks and
Harvey Korman Carroll it was Hedley
Lamarr and everyone would call him Hedy
Lamarr that was like the running joke in
affection that's right I fucking loved
Mel Brooks movies you remember the
yiddish-speaking Indians that that had
to be the best oh yeah that's right he
had some great movies man there's fun
fucking movies man just silly fun
outrageous movies yeah I mean he was it
he was transitional right I guess it was
the borscht belt being updated for the
modern era yeah into film yeah but it
was also it was you know for the time
much more contemporary but with that
sort of borscht belt sort of sticky sort
of right in the writers room I guess
from Sid Caesar show of shows was this
legendary factory before Saturday Night
Live for all of these kind of crazy
talents behind the scenes I think he
came out of that with Carl Reiner oh
that makes sense
he's how old is Mel Brooks now I don't
want to ask the question because maybe
something will happen I know right it's
one of the saw recently that he turned
93 and I thought shit is he dead like
Mel Burke you know because they were
saying all these great things Mel Brooks
I'm like fuck do we lose Mel Brooks but
it's like one of those things where is
it it's gonna happen
I mean he's 93 I know but every time it
does I know I mean I guess who Betty
White is another one of these people
right right and so we need these very
exotic links to our past and they become
more important as time goes on if
they're still vital because you know we
want desperately to be connected to
something before you know our current
era given that I think a lot of us sort
of don't believe in anything that
happened before Google right imagine
kids today imagine trying to describe to
kids today what it was like to grow up
without the internet
yeah or not being able to reach people
you have to make extensive plans and
yeah you know backup plans well if
you're not there at this time yeah used
to have to yell overnight you know yell
for your friend I remember when I first
got an answering machine that was the
most amazing thing ever when I was in
high school my family got an answering
machine I was like this is incredible
and you would you would leave like
stupid music like to let everybody know
you were cool like you have some cool
music like hey it's Joe not here right
now but if you leave a message I'll get
back to you probably and then you've got
like old people worst I think I think
someone in my family still has one of
these cutesy messages from like the late
80s really yeah on their voicemail but
then who leaves voicemail and the thing
that gets that marks me as an old person
is I actually call people mmm but that's
I like that I've been doing that more
lately yeah I call a lot of people now I
just feel like it's just it's better
that the texting thing the problem is if
I it's very interesting how we separated
ourselves into this the the this
electronic communication world where I
will during the day be in communication
almost constantly with a stream of
people the only thing that stops it is a
podcast
pasta podcast is mine my breasts for
three hours I'm not talking anybody
other than you so all those texts that
come through I'll get the end of the
Podcast I'll go and look at my phone
there'll be 40 texts sometimes okay this
is madness if I had to make 40 phone
calls
they'll be it would be impossible to
manage it would be it'd be calls
constantly be coming in you'd never
really be able to say anything so we
were feeding into this weird loop where
we just have these short-form things
right okay dinner tomorrow sure what
time how about nine I can do seven okay
let's do it you know I mean it's like
these weird little bursts of information
you ever see remember this program
California and that it wasn't called it
was a Californication double gin show
with yeah with the David Duchovny Yeah
right so there's the scene where he's
having some really hot intergenerational
sex and this gal says like lol and it
kills said it out loud she said it she
says lol and he loses total interest
there's no amount of the heat in the
moment that can compensate for the fact
that she's using like verbal emojis hmm
well he needs to fucking get over that
and it also depends on how you say it if
she's really funny she's like lol you
know and she's like being silly yeah I
said like you know I learned that from I
learned that from Jim Norton Jim Norton
will always say lol like he'll he'll say
something really ridiculous and then say
lol yeah but he's just what mocking him
said you're over 50 it's intrinsically
ironic right but you know in terms of
this weird thing about islands of time
one of the things that we do is we have
Shabbat dinner and every Friday
no matter how atheist and militant
people are against any kind of organized
religion they will leave us alone when
if we say we're going into Shabbat and
so there's this thing about like people
will pester me in all sorts of
situations but if I invoke something
that is vaguely religious even sam
harris probably wouldn't call me during
that period of time hmm I find that very
interesting like could you could you
create a religion that was simply there
to make sure that you had some time
offline yeah I know if i text ben
shapiro
I'm not getting a text back on Saturday
evers dark yep
but it went dark he text you as soon as
they're three stars in the sky there's
been on Twitter is like what did I miss
that's so weird it's so it's so weird
that people by I mean in on one hand I
think it's probably a really good idea
to just take a break from all that
electronic shit and just connect with
humans and a very old-school type of way
I think it's probably very good for it
connect with yourself I had this
experience I actually lived in Jerusalem
for two years and we landed in this
Orthodox round hotel and on Friday night
everything shut down you know like they
textbook and I then moved into a an
ultra-orthodox neighbor neighborhood
right in the on the boundary of a place
where the secular and the Orthodox met
what was really fascinating to me is I
started telling people you know you'd
never think that it's great not to be
able to find a restaurant or a nightclub
but it's amazing that it's this is
enforced downtown and about a month in
somebody said oh you're in the wrong
place of course you can go out on Friday
night you just go to the the Russian
compound and everything's hopping and
you can go dancing and drinking and all
these things after I knew that I went
dancing and drinking and I was much less
happy than believing that somehow Israel
actually shut down on Friday nights and
so very weirdly I appreciated that
constraint as soon as I knew you could
break the constraint I was less happy
and I would never actually obey it
anymore yeah I think having a rigid rule
even though it seems caught it seems
like counterintuitive in that in that
like it would provide you some freedom
by having restrictions but it does it
gives you some freedom like okay like
now we don't have to think about all
these other things so now we have the
freedom to just be alone now we have the
freedom to be relaxed now we have to
freedom to just talk to human beings you
know I think constraints and it's like
do you know Jocko is Jocko willing
totally everybody knows Jocko discipline
equals freedom discipline equals really
doesn't seem like that makes sense like
this motherfucker is up at 4:30 in the
morning
throwing heavy weights around grunting
and acting like a savage running goes
out to the beach and he earns the
sunrise every morning goes out and takes
photos you know takes a photo of his
fucking watch 4:30 hits the gym like a
savage and then takes a photo sometimes
of the sunrise earning the sunrise and
like but you would think God is like a
prison to like force yourself into that
but no no he know if there's freedom in
that because he knows he doesn't have to
make any decisions at four-thirty knows
what he's gonna do knows what he's gonna
do just you just go do it and that way I
mean you look at the guy he's a fucking
tank why is he a tank
cuz he's always up at four thirty
fucking throwing weights around it just
doesn't he never stops he never never
takes never takes self-indulgent time to
lay in bed and beat off and pick his
nose and then fucking check his text
messages does this thing of this right
now and thinking may I do a little bit I
don't think he does really know total
discipline yeah well did you I think I
remember reading his inner dialogue
about going to a birthday party and
breaking down and having a scoop of ice
cream or something or a slice of pie and
it's like you know the drama of there it
was temptation I held out for 45 minutes
but eventually I became weak yeah I
don't fuck with that I just do it I'm
gonna party just eat that cake no I mean
I just feel like I do it enough I'm
alright we're gonna be fine there's this
story about Jackie O that she got this
cancer diagnosis so there apparently her
first words upon finding out that she
had metastatic cancer was then what did
I do all those sit-ups for I met
interesting comment that's an
interesting comment she thought if
someone needs to talk to her
John JFK was keeping her in the dark is
that right yeah it must be what's
happening over there Jamie something on
TV yeah like telling her that sit-ups
you want you want no cancer sit-ups
that's the way to do it I guess I don't
know I mean I think I think we all we
have so many days of our lives
that we build this pattern that this is
going to go on forever and there's some
first moment I think I recall it where
the phrase popped into my head I can see
my death from here
and it has to do you know there's like
this weird thing when you hit 40 you
start to be able to have analytic
thoughts that are uninterrupted by sex
really yeah I don't know when I when I
turned 40 I found that some aspect of
thinking too much about sexuality
definitely decreased mm-hmm and then you
start to realize like you're when your
testosterone starts to go down you don't
feel you you don't feel like yourself
yeah you become a different thing yeah
yeah when your chemical composition
changes the way your body feels changes
the way you interface with the world
changes like I wasn't I wasn't feeling
all that great yesterday and I was sort
of clowning around with the person
behind the bar at Starbucks and she said
oh why are you down I said I don't know
just tell me something nice about my
hair and she says she looks at me she
says oh it's I love salt and pepper I
thought damn oh really
worst is that what you barely salt and
pepper I can barely see any she's just
talking about the salt
she's bullshitting you know she just
didn't want me flirting with her so she
just shut me down by saying you want me
to hold your hair okay you crossed the
threshold here yeah say but just that's
all right yeah soon as someone says say
something nice like doctor get ugly for
a girl exactly yeah
yeah and she was in the captive
situation wasn't being fair to her oh
yeah right
does that is the worst when we look
behind a problem we'd established a
rapport before that actually I actually
think she thought it was a kind and
sensitive comment hmm but but I don't
see any salt I'm looking now I'm just
fishing Joe there's I don't believe
there might be a few in there but not
like somebody's gonna screenshot and
they're gonna count all the hairs with
arrows this isn't something I've learned
when you come on your show your audience
is so large and active that they will
they will pinpoint every like timestamp
yeah there's a lot of people in cubicles
right now wasting their employers time
to those people we salute you Cheers
I should say for the folks at home that
before we started this you to ask me did
I want Laird Hamilton coffee and I said
Laird Hamilton coffee wetzler damn own
coffee and she gave me something laced
with turmeric now which may turn our
lips
funny colors so if now I don't know I
drink it every day all right it's fine
no it's really good though but it does
give you a little phlegm a little hmm a
little bit of that because it's got all
sorts of MCT oil and all sorts of great
stuff in there Laird Hamilton's a real
freak really interesting not a pioneer
yeah just like just talking to him and
hanging out with him and say seeing how
his brain works like you got to do that
yeah I'm on the podcast yeah it was
really really fun
so did you what does he okay this is
something I'm totally curious but I
don't surf welcome because surfing is in
my estimation going through some kind of
a renaissance right now I'm super keen
to understand what the series of
innovations are given that lots of other
things aren't innovating at anything
like the surfing innovation rate well
the big one is that new type of
surfboard what the hell's that called
like a sail foil yeah oil that thing is
amazing and it doesn't it's so weird
looking if you look at it like why are
you standing on like why is it elevated
well that is the magic carpet of the sea
let's be honest that's what it is and I
am obsessed I was asking it before yeah
there's this guy Kyle any who for me is
just redefining surfing by taking these
monster waves and he's turning them into
his private little skate park and doing
tricks off the top of skyscraper waves
and I'm just thinking do you even know
what you're doing or where you are
anything you keep saying this one phrase
which is I'm just scratching what blows
my mind is I'm just scratching the
surface he knows that he's making that
discontinuous jump and if you if you
think about sport from the perspective
of wended things just changed like
almost overnight
you know Bob Beamon are arguably is one
of the great moments in all of sporting
history and it happens in the long jump
just because you have an incremental
sport that suddenly you know somebody
jumps a foot more than anyone's ever
jumped before so that so it's really
interesting when somebody changes the
game it is in and when you find out that
there's stuff that you can do in other
sports like skate sports like different
crazy flips and stuff and someone
figures out how to do that
waive the consequences are so fucking
grave if you make a mistake and you're
on an 80-foot wave and that bitch comes
slamming down on you but part of the
innovation is safety right with these
vests inflatable vests and with these
water water safety courses for big wave
surfers I think that what's fascinating
is you think the innovation is in the
tricks maybe but maybe the innovation is
actually in hey you can afford a two
wave hold down in a way you couldn't
before hmm or you're gonna survive all
sorts of things that might have been
fatal right right so you have this open
area to innovate yeah
that may mean surfing's fascinating to
me I don't do it I haven't done it but I
went snorkeling when I was in Hawaii
last a couple weeks ago and I'm such a
pussy I'm just I'm smoking with my kids
right so of course like I'm trying to
figure out how to be the the mama duck
and like Corral everybody so if the
sharks coming it gets me I'm just trying
to just looking around cuz some guy got
gay he got jacked
are they snorkeling in Maui just a
couple months ago like right off of a
resort tiger shark yeah probably yeah
just a problem yeah well so yeah some
lady got it yesterday not yesterday a
couple days ago in was it the Bahamas
three sharks one took her arm off and
the other two just ripped her apart in
front of everybody
college kid yeah from California well
I'm very interested in situations that
change with sharks like Reunion for
example in the Indian Ocean off of
Madagascar used to be a surfing hotspot
and they had a bull shark problem where
the bull sharks just sort of learned how
to eat humans or attack humans but the
great thing is we have got some weird
thing going on with the true apex
predator of the Seas which is the Orca
we have one recorded bite in the wild
ever now how does this make any sense
are not apex predators because orcas
will just take them out right and
I had this poll on Twitter the other day
which is Orcas : best species ever was
number one then the other possibility
was the Dix of the deep because there's
such asshole I didn't know that there
was a recorded byte of anyone in the
while I thought it was all in captivity
no there's a certain there was a surfer
who got a bite really yeah but you know
on the other hand how are you gonna make
contact if you're an orca you don't have
opposable thumbs it might be for all I
know I mean look it has to be a joke
because otherwise the the guy would be
dead I mean if a orca wanted to kill you
and you're in the water that's like if
you let an ant go okay but why of orcas
never attacked us there's so many
recorded instances of swimmers
paddleboarders surfers running into
orcas some weird thing is going on and
we have to we have to work this out Joe
yeah let's try because we've got well
first of all what assholes are we that
we have those goddamn things in
captivity and a big fucking shout out to
Canada because Canada mostly probably
through the noise that my friend Phil
DeMars has created in trying to get
marine land shut down Canada has banned
all orca and all dolphin captivity it's
amazing and I hope the United States
does it as well I hope it I hope it goes
worldwide it's I think it's I think it's
slavery I really do I think it's a
different kind of slavery
they're almost us they're like a cross
between us and wolves in English well
they have they just don't have the
ability to manipulate their environment
but they have a cerebral cortex a
dolphin does it's 40% larger than a
human beings that's what is going on
there like this cerebral cortex you
there's thinking happening they're like
really complex highly a little thinking
well am i right that they have menopause
like they're the only that essentially
the only other species with menopause
mm-hmm and you're only going to get
menopause likely if females are
contributing some sort of like
intellectual labor past their
reproductive horizon wait because well I
thought menopause was just a shift in
the hormonal balance well what is the
purpose evolutionarily of continuing
life beyond
the ability to reproduce that's a good
point because that's doesn't that's not
the case in mammals and mammals deer in
particular can breed deep into their old
old age well if you have a resource
that's limiting you'd be better off for
in terms of systems of selective
pressures of shifting something that is
continuing past that point you know this
is the old point of it I think it was
Henry Ford who used to go to the the
dump to see what broke down on the cars
and what was still working mm-hmm he
would transfer materials and resources
from things that were dependably found
to work to the things that would be the
limiting feature that would break so
that the the cars would all break down
sort of uniformly at the end and you see
this like with salmon or salmon
disintegrate because it's a discretized
discretized reproductive strategies no
Salmons gonna make another run mm-hmm so
you might as well go out in a blaze of
glory right yeah that's interesting um
they also have a massive infanticide you
know that's the horrible thing about
dolphins they're ruthless they kill
their babies the male dolphins will kill
female dolphins babies in order to force
them in the asterisk yeah and that the
strategy that the female dolphins have
acquired to mitigate that is that they
become sluts because the male dolphins
don't know whether or not the females
baby is theirs because they don't have
23andme under the ocean so what happens
is the female will have sex with as many
males as she can yeah so that way she's
protected and her child is protected
because then all the males think it
could possibly be their baby they don't
want to kill their own baby which is
really interesting that they
differentiate because many mammals that
also participate in this don't like
bears don't differentiate between their
their babies and someone else's baby so
the females
and you know if she's carrying around
cubs the male will try to kill and eat
the cubs to force her back in estrus and
perhaps just even for food because
they're so ruthless and cannibalistic
right but dolphins who we think of as
our beautiful charming wonderful little
buddies in the water they kill babies
killer whales are of course
dolphins yes there are type of dolphin
so you know the the issue is you know I
think about white why do we not get
attacked it's like a professional
courtesy
assholes recognized absolutely I don't
know man but every time I go to Hawaii
we we swim with either not swim with
dolphins or if you're in a boat and you
go fishing
the Dolphins find the boat and they swim
with the boat I've never done that
it's show you a little video it's kind
of wild because what they do is they
literally go and they hang out with the
wave of your boat so as your boat is as
your boat is tuning along they they they
ride the wake they figure out a way how
to do that they figure out a way to get
in front of the boat and as the boat
it's pushing the water they just sort of
it like helps them along almost like
reverse drafting like because they're
kind of in front of it so as you're
pushing the water let me find it here
it's really interesting that they're
they're an incredible little animal I
mean it's so here it goes
see that's us in the boat it's way cool
yeah in a while just wild
I mean wild fuckin dolphins middle of
the ocean
they don't know you you could be an
asshole they trust you enough to try to
get our technology Joe they want the
boats I don't think so you don't think
so you think we're do that shit they're
laughing Harry hey well this we can do
this can you yeah they don't have to
carry anything we were carrying
everything by ourselves we're almost
useless naked useless we have to have
clothes you have to carry the clothes
you have to have shoes you got a that's
how we roll man we're extended phenotype
guys yes
do they think we're fools they think
we're yeah they're out there with free
food they don't worry about carrying
credit cards Bitcoin all that nonsense
they're out there in the ocean just a
bit they have a Bitcoin things coin to
the d-pad I don't think they do I think
they're probably pretty pissed they've
killed all the fish though yeah I think
that they're actually oh you know the
orcas figured out how to use our
Fisher's our fishing boats and just wait
for us to get stuff on the line and then
they're like it's evil thank you for
organizing my dinner yeah well some
orcas
are not that smart because they're not
adapting like there's a particulars I
conduct Amman oh yeah and they're trying
to figure out a way because the sama
populations
massively depleted due to a bunch of
different factors including they put
dams up and they've done a bunch of
stupid shit that they didn't they did a
long time ago and they didn't really
understand the consequences of it it's
really been devastating to the salmon
population up there and chinook salmon
in particular because this is what these
orcas eat now they also have this
migratory pod that comes in that relies
on marine mammals and the migratory pod
is doing great brilliant they're doing
great they're eating all the seals and
they're having a good old time but for
whatever reason the pod that stays in
that area doesn't want to eat marine
mammals they only want to eat chinook
salmon so they're fucking literally
starving to death you know I think they
read this book on fixed versus growth
mindset in the transit or transient pods
like hey every day is a new day we could
do something different the other one
saying no I'm kind of a creature of
habit you know there may be the salmon
they're coming back they just have a
very specific diet that they just won't
deviate from which I I find to be really
weird what is it that pods missing right
now cuz I probably all dead they haven't
they haven't been seen in over three
weeks which is the longest they have
been gone for Oh washington's resident
orcas go missing oh yeah I remember that
like no new babies had been born in the
Puget Sound and I hope um I hope they're
not dead and that's horrible I don't
know it's just sad because they can't
figure out a way how to teach them to
eat marine animals there's all these
different strategies they've tried to
figure out a way to teach them to eat
seals but they're not interested and
they've also decided to try to figure
out a way to farm-raised chinook salmon
and reintroduce them to that area but
then again you know you know so like how
do you how you designate those salmon
specifically for the orcas and not for
fishermen like what do you do when
people you know they catch fish what do
you do do you tell them put it back it's
for the Orca mmm yeah Joey I don't have
any actual expertise in this area me
neither
I'm just talking well you know we went
down to
a Hearst Castle and there's this
elephant seal colony there and my family
decided that this is the worst species
ever of mammal Alif and seals oh man
they're horrible
like first of all in terms of sexual
dynamics you know one beachmaster he's
got a couple lieutenants who are trying
to take over his role and the
lieutenant's seemingly can have sex with
one or two of the females like not too
much but just enough to keep them happy
yeah yeah right and then the beach
masters have to fight each other and
they're all these dead babies all over
the beach because the giant Bulls just
trampled them on their way to fights
right and so then then you have like the
females if they lose the pup they've got
to get rid of their milk so they steal
somebody else's baby so the whole thing
if you transpose like human if you
answered from horrifies you just think
these people are horrible this is a
crack house on the beach and there's no
way how do we get some great whites and
then remove these mammals immediately
they're making the family look bad
yeah maybe we could get the orcas to
start eating that's right yeah cuz orcas
are we have a deal yeah and it's a big
animal so it's a good meal look at those
dead babies that is so fucked up enough
they're all dead but there might be you
know yeah and they are lazy they are not
an industrious I mean they are when
they're in the sea but when they're just
on land well they just laying there oh
they're not dead they're just chillin oh
yeah they're showing well you've seen
when orcas do Beach themselves to get
those things right it's yeah well I mean
that they that it's right on the edge
they Hydra the hydroplane Honda and then
they waddle back in look I was like
scratched up they are from the ground
and everything it's a weird-looking
animal too what a weird fucking thing
that is William Randolph Hearst was a
real piece of shit
he really was you know he's the reason
why we have wild pigs in California that
dipshit imported wild boars and released
him on his property syndrome oh yeah
okay so we're driving down the highway
and my son says look dad wild zebras
I said haha son that's very cute he says
no no really
I look up and there's a herd of
wild zebras what hearst castle has
closed down the zoo
they let the zebras out we have a herd
of wild zebras in California that no one
told me about shut the fuck up are you
serious
I have won the Joe Rogan experience I
finally told you something you don't
know anything about specially about
invasive wildlife yeah that's crazy
so zebras in California that change your
mind a little bit one mr. Hearst no he's
a piece of shit all right
he's he's one of the main reasons why
marijuana became illegal was he smoking
too much
well it's all conspiracy theory and
conjecture but the story is the
traditional told by stoners with some
education story is that William Randolph
Hearst along with Harry Anslinger
conspired to make marijuana illegal when
DuPont came up with a chemical
composition for nylon and when it was a
combination of several factors and the
dcor Decatur was invented the core
Decatur was a way that they could
effectively process hemp fiber without
the use of slavery see the reason why
they switched over from hemp clothing
and hemp sales and canvas canvas which
is actually comes from the word cannabis
all cannabis was made for hemp yes I did
that all that stuff is made from hemp
it's far superior to cotton far superior
in terms of strength in terms of its
durability cousins jute I don't know
what Jude is Jude is what burlap bags
like oh yeah that's okay no hemp is a
alien plant
it's the hemp if you had a piece of hemp
like the stalk of hemp and you cut it
into boards like this table yeah that it
would be as hard as this oak but as
light as balsa wood it's incredibly
strange i I've seen these like the
actual stalk of a hemp tree when it gets
really big right and you'll have it
thick around like like a man's shoulder
right but it weighs like nothing it's
really strange
it's a strange strange plant not like
any other plant it has all the essential
amino acids it contains protein you can
cook with the oil the oil can sustain
you
it's got essential fatty acid one don't
ban it oh it's my fucking amazing
amazing plant alright but anyway they
came out with his dcor Decatur and the
decor Decatur because the the way they
used to do it was like a very
labor-intensive process of breaking down
the hemp fiber and turning it into
something that you can make clothes with
in paper notice so popular science
magazine in see if you could find to
cover this in like the nineteen nineteen
thirties had a cover said hemp the new
billion-dollar crop and because they had
this decor Decatur right so we Randolph
Hearst on top of having Hearst
publications right he also had paper
mills because you know he had to he
wanted to make his own paper so we had
these forests and he had paper and he he
would make paper out of wood there it is
well does it say there's a cover of it
though that says hemp hemp the new
billion-dollar crop that's just the
inside part of it see if you can find it
anyway um so William Randolph Hearst
would have had to have shift over
because hemp paper and if you ever
played with it no it's incredibly
durable it's crazy it's a it's hard to
tear it's really fuckin strong like it's
a fucking alien plant there's nothing
like it
it's so weird like you see a piece of
pay everything oh look at this light
piece of paper to tear it no no fucking
really durable so they were saying this
was gonna replace all paper that's made
out of wood and William Randolph Hearst
is like slowly roll bitches I got an
idea so he starts putting together all
these stories about Mexicans and blacks
that are smoking this drug called
marijuana and they're raping white women
and when Congress made marijuana illegal
they probably didn't even understand
that it was hemp because it was the same
goddamn thing marijuana was a Mexican
slang for tobacco for a while tobacco so
they repurposed this name and called it
this this plant called this marijuana I
gives this gigantic conspiracy so that
this fucking piece of shit could save
money
alright that's really what it was
because he had access he was like the
YouTube and the Google of you know
you belong with those 1930 he did blows
he had access he was the one who you
just decide what gets distributed and so
he that's in and that was big part of
the whole reefer madness film campaign
and all that shit all that stuff was all
about economics the whole thing was
about economics American farmers are
promised a new cash crop with an annual
value of several hundred million dollars
all because of a machine has been
invented which solves problems more than
six thousand years old
it is hemp a crop that will not compete
with other American products instead it
will displace imports of raw material
and manufactured products produced by
underpaid peasant and coolie labor
coolie labor wow what does that mean
I don't even know what that means let's
not talk about it 2008 means no no it'll
provide thousands of jobs for American
workers throughout the land so this was
all in February 1938 they thought they
were gonna they were gonna change the
world with this shit and then you had
all these people that were a part of the
whole prohibition for alcohol they just
shifted those motherfuckers over to him
I mean think about it's like over the
period of you know 10 15 years if you
had 10 15 years ago you know we're
talking about like 2004 you know you had
a bunch of people from the Bush
administration that we're really into
banning certain drugs and you still have
them hanging around you know a lot that
dipshit that was the Attorney General
for a while with the Foxes named that
little weasel the little weasel the
Trump got rid of sessions that piece of
shit that guy same thing same thing
these little weasel but for good people
don't smoke marijuana don't you you know
he's a Viper
he's a Viper is that what they used to
call people who smoked weed back in the
yeah he's not smoking weed well that
look anytime I see somebody's really
against homosexuality I said a clock
yeah right yeah and yeah you have to ask
yourself who in the modern era like I
found it astounding that when Elon came
on this program and had a blonde that
like it was an issue yeah and can you
imagine if like Elon it had a glass of
chardonnay well he did yeah I know but
the just the fact that our language and
our thought process around
right I see what you're saying I had a I
had a dinner at our house while ago
where we took some of the most
knowledgeable people on psychedelics and
related substances to just have a
discussion about what is the state of
schedule 1 pharmacology and we asked a
question of the interesting substances
what are the 3 that you find were most
informative in terms of self-revelation
changing your understanding for the
better etc I was astounded that of the
people who seemed to be very
knowledgeable about mind-altering
substances almost everyone put cannabis
in the top 3
why because so why would I thought it'd
be sort of commonplace you know I
wouldn't have guessed you know somebody
would say 5 Meo DMT somebody else would
say ketamine somebody else would say you
know LSD or DMT or ayahuasca but the
common thread throughout all of these
people who were many of them were
researchers was that they felt that
cannabis was miraculous substance well
it's certainly well the deal is it has
two different forms right as a smokeable
form which you know you can get really
fucking high or it has the edible form
which is like a psychedelic yeah but
it's like a psychedelic it's very much
so it actually is more psycho actors
there's something called eleven hydroxy
metabolites that it's only present when
you eat it I say it's processed by the
liver there's something called the
one-pass and when it goes through the
liver it produces this eleven hydroxy
metabolite that's somewhere between four
and five times more psychoactive than
THC and it's responsible for people
thinking that they got dosed like a lot
of times when people eat edibles think
oh my god this isn't pot something's in
there well it's just the 11 hydroxy
metabolite that's what it is it's known
about it yeah it's way different it's
way different like that's why it's
confusing to people like oh I can't fuck
with edibles it's a different drug it's
a different drug because 11 hydroxy
metabolite is not present in
psychoactive form when you smoke it so
when you eat it that's when you get that
really fucking weird body a high and
interdimensional relationship is it
better worse it's more interesting well
for the tank its bueno it's the best for
the isolation tank that's my favorite my
favorite is a good stiff dose of
inedible of an edible and then you know
wait about 45 minutes then get in the
tank so there's 45 minutes it's like the
way I describe it is like with certain
psychedelic drugs and I do consider
edible marijuana psychedelic especially
when you get into the 100 milligram 200
milligram doses it's very psychedelic
and especially in the tank because in
the tank when in the absence of any
visual stimulation you're when your eyes
are closed you have these wild almost
like neon visuals like I start you start
seeing these strange dancing cartoons
and like weird weird shit unrelated to
other substances you can get similar
situations on other psychedelics
especially in the tank the tank is a
really unique way to experience anything
even even normal psyche like the the
normal state the normal state of
consciousness that you have without any
drugs at all inside the tank it
transforms right because in the absence
of any sensory input and you don't have
anything coming your way you don't feel
your skin your brain starts really
getting free and loose and you start you
it gets very confusing as to what's
reality and what's not what are the
boundaries of vision and interpretation
and just creativity like well how much
of this is your imagination how much
this is not well you when you add any
sort of psychedelic to that tank
experience everything gets ramped up
it's like you know it's like you know
you add some drugs when you mix them
with other drugs they become like way
more potent that's what happens in the
tank the tank in and of itself is some
kind of a drug or it produces some kind
of profound drug like effects like it
can it be banned the tank and
how much experience you have with the
tank not much how many times have you
done it but I've been in once yeah it
was when I was a teenager ha man you
should have won all right I should it's
just a great way to relax - it's a great
way and you as a mathematician you think
of things in your conten you you're
spending a lot of time contemplating
things and you have to realize that any
other input whether we think about it or
not is chewing up some bandwidth yeah
although I actually have a kind of
ambient level of distraction which is
help most helpful for look at when I get
out there I get way the hell out there
so you like an ambient level of
distraction sometimes for example I'll
go to an all-night cafe and like 2:00 in
the morning and they'll be oh just
enough human I mean I have very
ambiguous feelings about humans
don't worry I'll consider you one what
are you what do you consider yourself
we'll talk about this one okay yeah no I
really think that in many ways I've left
this planet real yeah I think that
there's a way in which I've checked out
how so well I think that when you get
deep enough into your own mind and you
start dealing with abstractions and you
find that the real world I wasn't
planning on going it where we can try it
when you find that the real world is
often a kind of noisy place to think
and that you actually prefer really
powerful abstractions and then you check
in with the real world to say does that
abstraction actually govern the world
that I'm in you start to prefer living
in the abstractions that's interesting
like do you feel the same way about like
a crowded nightclub like if you go to a
bar and you do you find that that
stimulates thinking well it depends I
mean if I'm in a stimulating
conversation I'm very present hmm if I'm
at a nun stimulating conversation I have
to make my own fun right and so I will
start to sort of play I mean you know at
times I'll just make up a story and see
how it flies
you know if I don't think I'm hurting
anybody and sometimes I'll sort of
experiment with people I think we're all
do it you experiment with people well
sure like you like say something to
someone see if they bite well you know
it's like let's let's imagine for
example you were gonna move to Austin
okay are you gonna just be the same old
you you're not gonna take the
opportunity to perhaps reinvent yourself
so for example you know if I suddenly
change if I start wearing glasses and I
wear like a really fashion-forward pair
of spectacles
you should wear aviators with yellow
lenses like hunter s Thompson I don't
like that I like that with you with your
crazy hair yeah you with some yellow
aviators and don't even address it don't
go in public yeah where I'm indoors oh
but if I do any sort of alter is like
maybe maybe I've never seen what what I
look like with a bald head so if I were
done bitch yeah if I was gonna move
cities when's the best time to try it
try something new right and so you know
at our at our age Joe yes how old are
you 53 yeah that's all right yeah I'm 51
almost 52 so the great danger is
complacency and so I I'm terrified about
becoming complacent so I always want to
experiment change like what is it that I
could continue to do to grow and if you
can't play an experiment like maybe you
know imagine you wanted to you wanted to
go by Joseph I'm just to see whether it
worked
mmm whatever it is we get so locked in
and if we change anything people get
angry and I've always looked at Madonna
and David Bowie as like genius squared
not only did each iteration of them do
something that was kind of artistically
interesting but they habitually their
audience for change and so the idea is
that every time you you met a different
David Bowie you know he would
effectively say do you like this
incarnation of me because it's not going
to be it's only here for one year and
then I'm going to do something new the
next time and I just had conversation
with Sean Lennon
in which we talked about how his father
John Lennon always kept changing and yet
people want to plug in with the idea
that John Lennon was just the guy who
wrote imagine let's say right and that's
that's a great danger is that if you
think about like your output somebody
will say well you know didn't you in
tweet X gotcha it's like well you know
maybe you have 10,000 tweets and maybe
you changed maybe maybe new information
came in so yeah that is a weird thing
about pulling up thoughts that you had
from a decade or more ago and trying to
put them on you today
yeah and pretending and if you say I
don't think that way anymore
people don't want to accept that they
will because it's a disingenuous
conversation they're not really trying
to find out what you think they're
trying to get you you know it's more
interesting for example there's been a
ton of pressure we can get to this in a
second - for me to address the question
of the IDW is it still alive is it the
national dork web yes I was the
intentional dirt dirt bag with the let's
come back to that when cher did this
remake of I got you babe with beavis and
butt-head she took this remember cuz she
had this duet with Sonny Bono and then
she got into a bad thing with Sonny and
so she said I'm gonna rerecord the song
and I'm just gonna torch it right now
the problem is somebody had that as
their wedding song right Eve uh some but
hood no no this is the way yeah oh I
mean somebody probably did with beavis
and butt-head but yeah there's some
point they don't care people from
Florida okay that one
all right that's Florida man is the
problem when you change things is that
other people Wed themselves to where you
were so when you pull up and you say
yeah I don't think that that's just
wrong I was confused man I was going
through a dark time and I probably was
saying stuff I should if you do that
right anybody who sort of invested in
that version of you and integrated that
into their law
is now angry they're upset mmm wait a
minute you pulled the rug out from under
me and so right you know in part with
what Bowie and Madonna did is they said
look these are stages and if you like
that stage that stage is yours but I'm
not staying there and I think that
that's sort of the more responsible way
of doing is that you're allowed your
evolution but you have to let people
know I'm gonna do something totally
different from time to time I like the
idea of doing things or just do it just
do it
yeah don't try to explain yourself cons
love it they didn't explain themselves
right they just they did it in a clear
enough way that people could understand
the pattern and so you know for example
and this is something that I think would
be kind of interesting to talk about
everybody is losing their mind at the
moment in the space that you and I sort
of Cohen habit of ideas and trying to
figure out how do we remain sane and
plugged in and open-hearted and open to
new things but also rigorous and fair
like all of these weird pressures the
ideas behind the intellectual dark way
yeah that you coined this this concept
of having a bunch of people that have
different ideologies but yet share this
common theme of wanting to have real
honest communication and honest
conversations and try to figure out
instead of looking at things from an
ideological perspective look at things
from an honest objective point and and
try to see the way other people
open-hearted and not not trying to
destroy each other right yes and
effectively trying to become the adults
in the room as we watch the kids run
riot right and and and not always not
always achieving that now because I
refused to actually say what it was or
who was in it because there was a lot of
pressure to codify it I knew that if I
codified it it would die I want a
membership card you have you have one
but if I don't if I don't get one you
have way there's a clubhouse
we just don't tell the members where it
is because there's an article about the
IDW that doesn't mention me I'm like yes
yeah yeah I'm slipping away but well I
do like Pacino and three always gonna
brag you back it's uh but there are
there's been some discussion about
certain members and certain people that
are losing their fucking marbles yeah
yeah I think it's pressure you know and
I think one of the things that we're all
recognizing from whether it's the
internet and or just celebrity in
general which I think part of the
culprit is especially if you're reading
comments and articles that are written
about you which I do not recommend if
you are doing that and doing that don't
do that
if you're doing that you are subject to
a massive amount of pressure yeah it's
it's a lot of pressure and sometimes
people they apply that sometimes that
pressure can help you like if it's a
good friend or someone who you trust and
it's done with intellectual honesty and
they just really they think that there's
maybe a flaw and you're thinking or
maybe this could help you or maybe this
is an issue and then you realize that
and yourself correct that's great but
there's a lot of people that are bending
to the will of the masses and they also
are responding to the pressure of the
mass I don't even think it's the masses
I think no I reasons I read my comments
is because I want to know what Russia's
thinking I'm not kidding listen to me
Joe here we go that's good either ever
well for sure and we went we talked
about this recently let me just say this
before you get going yeah we knew that
something was going on years ago I used
to have a message board and on my
message board of my website it became
problematic for legal reasons people
were putting a bunch of illegal shit up
there and I was kind of responsible for
then a few issues came up where I was
like oh Jesus I'm gonna I'm gonna get in
real trouble we had an influx and by an
influx I mean thousands and thousands of
Russian emails signing up from my
message board I mean thousands with
really similar email addresses and they
would post and pretend they're from
fucking Cleveland or post and be mad
that we don't have enough Nazis
or whatever the fuck it would be you
know right it would just be the same
thing that the IRA was doing the
internet research agency was dealing
with Facebook and Google into it we were
seeing this like four or five years ago
that this stuff was kind of happening
where they were recognizing that there's
these large portals of discussion and so
they were trying to manipulate that
discussion and turn certain discussions
toxic and certain and you know and come
up with preposterous conspiracy theories
and attack people for nonsensical
reasons well this is the thing I keep
seeing the same message modified a
hundred different ways from a bunch of
accounts that have suspicious similarity
not one of these accounts usually is
followed by anyone I care about and then
they have a few high-value accounts with
blurry photographs of a person that like
I I think somebody's like putting real
money into that account to create a fake
person who just dog dog idli follows you
and is constantly trying to talk to you
in your ear that account but how do you
know that that's what that is and how do
you know it's not just some person on
schizophrenia that really is really
interested in Eric Weinstock a couple
times I've tried to like talk to the
person and suddenly that the thing
vanishes it's like you're so disgusting
I would never talk to you it's like
goodbye click well maybe they just
panicked could be just a person well
that's the thing we we you never know on
the other hand that you remember when we
took that photograph at that dinner yeah
there was this huge number of jokes
about ben shapiro and a booster seat
there were all slightly different
versions of the joke and all of the
accounts were like striking it's similar
mmm I was thinking like well I I could
imagine a little bit of this but it's
way too many and this is part of what I
believe I believe that we are in a new
world in which a lot of the grassroots
stuff is astroturf and if you start to
listen to it you start to get pushed and
I start to watch certain tactics and I
make models of the tactics you know like
one of the tactics is gosh Eric I once
thought that you had a lot of integrity
and now I know that X
you know if you don't if you don't
address this situation I'm done
following oh really
goodbye click but I believe that I
believe that there are sophisticated
players who are engaged in trying to
either boost our signal or start to
alter the signal somebody will be up
somebody will be down and then there's
like really weird dynamics I think that
there's a very strange thing going on
not with Dave Rubin but with the crowd
of people that is just trying to eat
Dave Rubin and had been blind him and
confuse him mmm and this you know this
is this guy Sam cedar who do you think
he's a Russian I hope he is well I don't
know I don't think he's Russian but I do
think that his his I think he has a
grassroots following I don't think this
is inauthentic that just loves to dark
harass well dunk drag I hate this
language I just get honking I like the
word dunk oh really
yeah that's fun no I'm not I'm not a fan
no no no because it's just it cheapens
all converse oh you got dunked on you
got dragged just like oh this is that
thing in third grade that I never
figured out well they found out that he
won't engage them and so they think it's
cute to just constantly shit on them and
they also think it's cute to take
anything that he says and interpret it
in the worst possible way possible and
not think of it as him just being a guy
who's trying to talk about things on the
fly and maybe isn't even prepared about
the subject at hand like one of the
things it comes up on this show like you
know we were talking before we were
gonna go on there where we and talk
about Mike come on let's just talk yeah
and so when you do that come on let's
just talk thing yeah you never know what
the fuck is gonna come up and you might
have a piss poorly formed idea of what a
subject is if you just I ramble yeah
that's what I've done my two previous
yeah well no you're not but it seems you
know it's easy to think that you did
that
but with Dave
you know there's enough moments where
he's misstepped where they just feel
like okay we got a wounded antelope yeah
they're trying to pick him off and you
know I think there was probably a move
to do Shapiro and there was a period
where you were seemingly in the
crosshairs but you're hard to kill and
you know I have no doubt that I was in
the crosshairs
I wasn't even noticing see that's the
that's the benefit of not paying
attention and this is something that
I've been pretty rigorous about over the
last like six months all the years you
Sam Harris and Dave Rubin have all given
me versions of this advice and I worry
about it because I'm not large enough
yet that I've been the target of a
steady campaign but what happens is you
see people's feedback loops interrupted
and in part to course-correct you kind
of want to know what was I too harsh
with that guy like when I went on with
Jordan Peterson on Dave show I was more
aggressive because I think I'd seen
Jordan and Brett on your show together
and I come from an ethnic family we
interrupt each other that's normal and
Jordan is an interrupter and so what I
found is is that I probably was
intuitive that I had to be more forceful
a lot of the comments said Wow Eric I
haven't really seen you this aggressive
was there three of you on the
conversation it started off Dave Jordan
and myself and then Ben Shapiro came in
for an hour and I think Sam Harris might
have been scheduled to come in and
reliever there's an issue always with
more than one person there's a reason
why I do one-on-ones almost exclusively
yeah like even when I had Bob Lazar with
Jeremy Korbel just just having a third
person that wants to chime in like
oftentimes interrupts the flow of
conversation like in that case it was
because I wanted to lock in on Bob Lazar
right I wanted to get all my feed but I
want to find out is this guy full of
shit what I want to I want to lock in
with them and well there's another one
and also and also there's another person
even if they have a good thing to say
it's a distraction it becomes a problem
you never know when one of these is
gonna work and when one of
when it works it can be magical and yes
when it doesn't you know it's a little
bit like jazz guys if that group is
meant to be then they don't trip over
each other solos and they're trying to
come up with something even with three
great friends I have this issue I mean
it's just seen great stuff with multiple
people on your show and I've seen stuff
that doesn't work and you know the other
the other night we had Bryan Callen is
fast becoming one of my favorite people
in the world and he had us over and was
really fascinating it was all guys who
could rip your head off not your head
off they could certainly rip my head off
and very thoughtful ones at that there
were people from all different
ethnicities my wife was the only female
and one of the things I found astounding
was that everybody was taking the piss
out of each other and it was the most
intimate positive loving kind of an
environment you could imagine where
people are joking about each other's
ethnicity their religion and I had to
remind myself about how men actually
manage intimacy and closeness and it's
not the way women do it any shit on each
other we share on each other and it's
friggin important to how we do business
and increasing Lee I have this idea that
I need that in my life well we have to
check each other to see if each other's
taking each other seriously you have to
make sure you're not taking yourself too
seriously I didn't feel like lots of
jokes were made at my expense I was
probably the only guy there who wasn't
you know some form of a combat sport
veteran and you know there were a couple
of jokes at my expense on that there
were a couple of Jewish jokes
I felt terrific leaving that place there
was no part of me that felt like wow I
really got hazed but I hope I got
through it I mean these guys were just
so positive yeah and generous of spirit
Brian is one of the best of that he's so
silly like most of his podcast that he
does yeah then with me and him out
pretty cool podcast we've known each
other forever we've been best friends
since 1994 is that right yeah I mean cuz
that guy's smart
I love him so much that I broke up with
this girl
and uh Brian she was she was calling me
because she was horny and I was like
look I have a new girlfriend but I have
a friend fuck you and he's just like me
high six Brian on my ex-girlfriend and
he fucked her one of the funniest
conversations I ever had with an
ex-girlfriend she calls me up she goes
your friend came inside me and I went
what she goes yeah your fucking friend
came inside me and I was like well did
you tell him that you're on the pill she
was no no I'm not on the pill and I was
like well I don't know what to tell you
you know that's Brian you guys should
have worked that out it's girlfriend
call you up mad because your friend
ejaculated inside of her it was one of
them uh hung up the phone I literally
fell to the ground laughing I was lying
on my back on the floor of my house like
it's just so ridiculous as Bryan Callen
Frank how's everybody so I called him up
I said you what happened and he's like
whoops it was just such a ridiculous
conversation but I've been friends with
that guy forever
so all of our conversations are like
that I said all of our conversations are
like jokes and hazing and shitting on
each other but it's all hugs and love I
mean I'm so positive and generous and
you know one funny thing I was looking
at his Instagram and he's seated next to
I know it I can't remember was it
cheetah wild yeah and he's talking about
how he who's next with it I like to get
up in the morning perhaps we will hug
together
I smell antelope nearby just like he's
cloudy there's a real cheetah
yeah but the cheetahs are interesting
then you can actually pet them it's
weird I think there's like it was a game
reserve
I see like uh one of those like so far
no no no no yeah a lot of that is in
Africa I'm not in terms of like like
they're they're not pets
yeah but they're so used to people
because people always go on safari there
and apparently you can get real close to
them in some environments but cheetahs
in particular
a lot of people keep them as pets like
you see like a lot of sheiks like rich
guys in the Middle East they'll be
driving around and they're fucking AMG
wagons with a cheetah next to them a
cheetah on a leash and the Cheetahs just
cool with it
see nobody nobody nobody is that with
hippos I think if you wanted to go next
level yeah that wouldn't work out
hippos just decided to fuck you up yeah
what is with us in the hippos hippos are
like they're our cousin two pigs and
they're right yeah they're a ruthless
fucking animal oh now I see it
they don't play any games yeah and for
vegetarians it's not even like that
we're their food they are vegetarians
but do you eat meat I know the kid well
sewed up dear
you know deer and cows they'll eat birds
we're not going back into that vampire
deer thing they've known on freaked me
out last time
but deer oftentimes eat birds the ground
nesting birds there's a lot of video of
it like people don't want to believe it
they think that you know they just eat
grass most the time they do but they
will eat a bird if they get a chance you
know they know it's food yeah it's weird
yeah and they have an herbivores
digestive tract but notice they'll eat a
bird there's a lot of video well idea I
guess I've been really fascinated by the
number of species in which some human
like totally deadly species where some
human has decided I'm gonna dedicate my
life to hanging out and not getting
eaten hyenas there's some asshole that
is I mean he's he's hanging out with
hyenas on the internet and petting them
they seem really playful and friendly
real sweet it's real weird
this guy's like nuzzling these hyenas
imagine choosing vania that's your
system hey that is an animal that bites
so fucking hard they have they have like
one of the strongest bites ever measured
because they're their whole thing is
just smashing bones and trying to get
out the nutrition that the Lions leave
behind so they're all just about
crushing bones so they're their whole
face is designed to smash bones yeah and
you know they're their fucking roots see
here's the guy he's hanging out with his
hyenas he plays with them look at this
asshole but stay there playing with them
there yeah they seem to think he's like
their buddy look they're all they're
biting him but they're gentle I mean
they could rip
his arm clean off but they're biting his
leg and you know he's nuzzling with them
it's lady read his face I do not know I
do not know because I think a lot of
these have to do with him pretty oh yeah
for sure yeah well that was the thing
with my friend Phil DeMars who worked at
Marineland one of the reasons why he's
so furious at diamonds because he's got
a walrus named smooshing and the walrus
imprinted with him when it was really
young walrus thinks that's his mom okay
that he's rather the walrus his mom you
know so he's just on this fucking
furious quest to get this walrus
released and to shut down this shithole
known as marine land yeah he's been sued
forever he's been involved in lawsuits
as long as I've known them and he's been
coming on this podcast for years for
years we've been you know trying to
boost his signal and trying to get the
word out and then when blackfish came
out that sort of really turned the tide
right where people got a chance to see
what Orca captivity is really like and
they're like holy Sh this is horrific
it is absolutely barbaric but um anyway
his uh that's that's uh his this walrus
come from him he gave me that that's
cool that yeah that sits there for fill
that sits on the desk for Phil who is
the Hall of Fame here in the desk is
there a camera over there oh this is
just so these are all little little
little statuettes from the company
called plastisol uh-huh and plastisol is
how do you say Fong's name farm Tran
he's an amazing artist who's created all
of these little little little figurines
this is Rory MacDonald who's a elite UFC
fighter Bruce Lee notorious b.i.g that's
my dog Marshall Marshall has one that's
me
Tupac Conor McGregor Kanye and then that
is a different one the bobblehead one
dozen rich rebuilds he's got this really
dope really dope website or YouTube
channel where he he's the only guy that
I know of that's ever rebuilt a Tesla he
bought a wrecked Tesla uh and then
bought another one and put the parts
together and
figured out how to make it work and the
Tesla people do not like him they don't
like these doing that now he's made a
place called the electrified garage in
Massachusetts where he is working on
Tesla's and electric vehicles outside of
their ecosystem so he's doing it on his
own like an independent Muslim
Massachusetts you think he's gonna
hybridize with Boston Dynamics no he's
an independent guy that would be cool
he's not how do you say his last name
Benoit right it's been naught it looks
like binoy but it's Benoit very cool guy
he was on the podcast recently hey what
happened would we know about the Kanye
situation we're just gonna talk about
mental health I was kind of excited
about that I you know if he wants to he
can do it I'm not yeah don't he's he's a
he's a something he is a brilliant
artist but oftentimes a brilliant artist
it's not this is not the best format for
them to just talk like sometimes it's
better for them to express themselves
through their work maybe although I
found you know I spent two days with
them and I found that when he's in a
relaxed frame mm-hmm his flow state is
just it's beautiful well I enjoy talking
to him I talk to him on the phone I
really enjoyed our conversation we had a
nice conversation he said I think he's a
very good dude very sensitive human yeah
very cool guy but this is not a relaxed
environment you know this right here
everybody knows how many people are
listening it's just if fucking people's
head up really because the illusion that
I have is it's just you and me talking
and then I come out of here and people
what'd you say well you and I are
friends
so that illusion is more maintained when
you don't know me and you come in and I
mean I would have to be friends with
that's one of the things he wanted me to
come to his church you know he's got
these running occult essentially
everybody's wearing white they're all
dance and doing religious stuff I'd do
that yeah
so you're busy yes your family 38
Sunday's are fairly well I've run into I
just I get it
I think it's beautiful you know but I'm
not he and I were walking down the road
and you know there was this crippled
alert yet across from Long Beach said
you know Kanye you better stay in
Calabasas it was like a little bit of a
tense situation we're walking along the
road and like people were hanging out of
the windows of their car you like Kanye
and I think was just like posit you know
like right make contact but it was very
disconcerting and this guy was
preternatural II call you know who's
just like mmm-hmm I was nervous how long
goes this this was you remember when II
went on TMZ well the we talking a year
or less yeah I think is probably a year
ago it's probably medicated not anymore
was that right yeah yeah he talked
openly about the fact that last six
months or so he's been off of his
medication and he whatever they had him
on was fucking with him creatively well
you remember Oliver Sacks had this
chapter and the man who mistook his wife
for a hat about a drummer with
Tourette's syndrome no and then he just
took a drug to control the Tourette's
syndrome and the guy's drumming became
kind of monotonous very regular but like
not creative
yeah you look the what that guy's got
inside of him he's so prolific
I mean you listen to his music it's so
interesting and eclectic and prolific
and he just constantly churning out more
great shit he doesn't have any flops I
mean his music is pretty fucking amazing
and he's just that's his shit man he
knows how to just get in there and
create and he's got this whirlwind going
on in his mind he's fearless yeah he's
got he is explore and wanting into the
details but one of the things that
really impressed me was he would go to
places that I'm too scared to go to in
my own mind and just well just you know
thinking about your inadequacies and
externalizing them and your
vulnerabilities and knowing
you know what is going to emasculate you
and his point is like I'm so comfortable
with myself that I'm gonna mine that as
a source of art because I bet it's in
everyone and you know by exploring these
contradictions and these false fronts
and you know he's he's got a level of
internal access I I'm actually quite
interested in the mental health aspect
of this which is there's so much so much
mental unhealth as we as we term it
mm-hmm
that I don't think it's all mental and
health I do think that there's something
about the artistic process that seems to
be very informed by states that we call
in health yeah well we require people to
stay inside these rigid boundaries and
these rigid boundaries they're they're
great if you want to show up at a job
and work 9:00 to 5:00 and don't use
certain noises with your mouth because
it makes people upset you know but
that's not for the creative process if
you look at true outliers if you want to
discuss true outliers like people that
are really capable of producing
extraordinary art or architecture or
works you know different interesting
things that are part of the creative
process those people are all unwell
every single one of them I mean in terms
of like if you made them do what a
normal person has to do every day I
think normal life is unwell in terms of
this this requirement of showing up five
minutes early working all day long
getting off maybe bringing some of your
work home getting some sleep
getting up in the morning and doing it
all over again all while raising a
family and trying to enjoy your time
your limited finite time on this planet
well this is why I said I've left after
you left is that it's not healthy here
so where are you well maybe maybe this
is a good segue I hadn't thought about
this way but so can we use this format
to announce that I am in fact starting
the podcast I've recorded a couple boom
episodes already that are in the Canon
is it is called the poor
the portal yeah hmm so the portal is
refers to this this very interesting
thing that I I thought everyone was
aware of but very often people wouldn't
react to it when I was a kid I read all
of these stories that I thought were
known to be the same story but different
versions of it and I called it the
portal story and it was always the same
somebody is trapped in a humdrum
existence in an ordinary world until
some sort of magical portal accidentally
or on purpose enters their life and
either they go through a wardrobe they
go through a rabbit hole Looking Glass
platform 9 and 3/4 or you know Dorothy
famously was used to introduce
Technicolor where she the first part of
the film she's in Kansas and it's an
sort of grayscale black-and-white all
that and then she lands in Oz and they
opened the door in it's Technicolor and
there's this transitional scene where
you see Technicolor for the first time
was that the first time ever in a movie
I believe so and so ah so the question
is where's the portal like why do we
tell the same story over and over and
over again with different protagonists
but it's always the same formula it's
somebody is trapped in an ordinary world
they're sort of there were around
normies they find the portal and the
portal becomes the call to adventure and
they spend time in the alternate
universe and then somehow they're able
to live very often they return if you
remember the Phantom Tollbooth Milo gets
this present of a car in a toll booth
and he goes through the toll booth any
what is that from mm Norton Juster was
the author and Jules Feiffer was did
illustrations it was just this brilliant
book where there's like the land of
letters and the land of numbers so it's
Arts and Sciences
and you know like there's a there's a
person who starts from his head and
grows down until his feet reached the
ground and there's a numbers mine and he
has to rescue the princesses of rhyme
and reason in order to restore order
between the two kingdoms of the you know
like left and right hemisphere it's some
incredibly exciting story and the idea
is that after he goes and does all of
these I think there's an island called
conclusions and when you make an
assumption you leap to conclusions so
you suddenly jump I mean it's all very
clever wordplay and stuff huh at the end
of the adventure the tollbooth
disappears because it has to go to the
next kid who needs you know and so my
question was always why why on earth
would we tell the same story over and
over and over and over and over again it
has the same format and it's always a
different context and I came to believe
that this story is actually this unkept
promise for most people that in their
adult lives they don't find these
portals so for example have you ever
been to Barcelona Spain no there is a
church in Barcelona Spain
which is plenty impressive from the
outside when you go inside I've been
looking pictures of it my entire life
called la Sagrada Familia it is a
psychedelic drug trip and a half like
you've never seen it is the most bizarre
interior space I have ever seen in my
life can you bring up the interior of
this thing
whoa and on the one hand it induces like
a hallucinogenic state on the other hand
it's an idea of what this architect
Gaudi now Gaudi is very famous he did a
lot of buildings around Barcelona there
is nothing like the inside of this
church on this planet and Wow
fuck that's beautiful and if you look up
at the roof and like you know most
things you're sort of prepared for them
your whole life and then you see it you
think yeah I guess I guess that's cool
I've been seeing this thing my whole
life and I had no
no concept of what a genius this human
being was because nothing he did really
outside of it the outside of it I mean
look this guy if he never did the inside
of this church he would be a very famous
an idiosyncratic architect Wow but they
do him work on three
they haven't finished it and in fact
he's such a he's such a genius that they
can't finish it in the style that he
started it because nobody knows it's
like an unfinished symphony what would
you do nobody's smart enough to finish
this church Wow look at the roof on that
okay now that is a portal rather that is
a portal right and when we when I was on
this program before you know I thought
long and hard what is it that I could
push out to the planet to let people
know how wonderful and beautiful the
world that we live in is and we pushed
at the hopf fibration and suddenly if
you recall I said to people this is the
most important object in the universe
not the hopf fibration in particular but
the class called a principle bundle
which people have no idea it's out there
and it is the basis of the construct in
which we live so how is it the normal
human being can make contact with real
physics with you know real beauty of
biology or you know just understanding
order symmetry all of these things that
are beyond normal experience and what I
hope to do with the podcast is to have
amazing guests and interesting
conversations but just oh thank you for
that that guy was on drugs that guy was
he was drunk yeah well that's you know
remember that's what Dali said somebody
said dolly do you take drugs he said I
am drew
right another Spaniards Spaniards are
really something but that is very
similar to psychedelic states well maybe
some people have access to them all the
time right in part well there's no this
is actually an illustration that sits
above our sink out there a guy who has
tumor in his pituitary or his knots
pituitary gland his what is the one that
the one that they think produces DMT
what the fuck is it called not the
pituitary gland no pineal Pine Anna
thank you he has a tumor thank you
tumor in his pineal gland and so he he
accesses these states all the time so
this guy has it's a hundred percent DMT
inspired artwork I mean if you look at
it that's like what you see when you do
DMT trips it's like it's a version you
know in the in his style of art but you
you can see the the you can see the
signature yes DMT there it is there's
his artwork what is his name Sean
Thornton Sean Thornton Thank You Sean
thanks for the artwork it's fucking
awesome it's it's in our kitchen I'll
take a picture of it later and put it
online but that's his stuff like that's
super DMT like that's amazing I mean
that's a thing
a trip to mean type experience like you
could say like Alex gray is probably the
most representative I would say he's the
most representative in terms of artists
in the the DMT space in terms of like
tryptamines and psilocybin and things
along those lines and so if you think
about psychoactive chemicals some of
them are stupefying but some of them are
portals and this concept of if you look
at a wall how do you know that the wall
doesn't have a door how do you know that
there's no panic room behind the
bookcase if you just pull out the right
book we are we learn to stop looking for
the portal and I think what I what I do
differently than other people is that I
became obsessed with exits that there
are other worlds and they're real that
this this mythology of the looking-glass
and the rabbit hole
The Matrix is metaphor for very real
things and that we just we live our
lives in the most ordinary mesoscale
phenomena where you know we don't see we
don't see the quantum because we're not
you know playing with polarized lenses
in ways that show us what light actually
is you know we're not playing with
superfluid helium we're not
understanding just how bizarre
olfaction is or you know whether there's
some sort of quantum aspect of biology
and what you see people doing is that
they're they they start grasping for
everything like I'm not saying that
there's nothing to ancient aliens or
UFOs or whatever but a lot of that is
just people want something richer and
more more amazing for their lives and
I'm not going to pass too much judgement
on that but I am going to say if we just
restricted the the rest of our days to
the provable stuff that we know is out
there it could be amazing people need
more meaning with all of the rationality
with all the mystery we've taken out of
the world it's time to put a ton of it
back in when you say put a ton of it
back in like I gonna put it back in well
you know if I were to start talking
about the octo nians an eight
dimensional number system that no one
understands I can do that totally
rigorously I can show you all sorts of
bizarre stuff involving the octo nians
what is the octo no well that's my point
you don't even know that there are four
types of numbers whose dance called the
real numbers that we know complex
numbers that you were tortured once with
in high school maybe during some kind of
a trip a friend of you mentioned the
court mentioned the quaternions to you
and then there's this one system of
numbers which is like the crazy relative
nobody discusses and that's called the
octo nians and the Arcturians are so
weird that mathematicians don't even
really understand why they're there
that's a knock Tony on that thing well
my guess is that that's probably back to
the
root lettuce a v8 which we discussed
last time which has this kind of Mandela
pattern to it but I could show you their
multiplication table I could describe
their symmetries there's a symmetry
group called g2 which involves these
strange numbers but it's a mystery like
if I got two I probably know more about
the octo nians than most mathematicians
if I got to the end of all of my
knowledge of the Arcturians I still
wouldn't know what to tell you about why
they're there and what they mean nobody
knows I promise you that that's a real
mystery now we could talk about like you
know my friend said that that event that
happened in Siberia in the early you
know 20th century was actually an alien
visitation well maybe yes maybe no I
don't know anything about it if I just
focused us unlike what we know is out
there that we don't grasp which is 100
percent rock-solid it provides so much
mystery and meaning and invitation to
adventure like if you if you're looking
for a hero's journey I'll show you a ton
of these things and it's empowering it's
just incredibly it's incredibly
empowering to know that you're a hair's
breadth away from superpowers so I want
to help people explore that so what is
that like when you're explaining this
when you're saying this is bizarre
series of numbers right what is it doing
like what how do we interface with it
well so for example let's let's take an
easier system that we feel a little bit
more confident with there's this thing
called the quaternions which are based
on the number one the complex number I
if you remember that from some distant
math class and then there's something
called J and K so I times J equals K J
times K equals I J times I is equal to
the negative of I times J so negative K
there's a multiplication table for these
these objects and these objects help
with computer vision you know computers
simulation 3d projections they're used
all the time
in probably videogames they may come up
in nature I mean we know that nature
uses complex numbers and most people
never found out why they were being told
about complex numbers or imaginary
numbers because they never got to the
point where you're actually looking at
wave functions that describe photons and
electrons and all of all of that good
stuff that you read about in physics so
in essence the the octo nians are a
system where ijk keeps going effectively
through elemental PQR you know till
you've got eight different objects and
they're not even associative which is
one of these rules that you learn about
like you know multiplication is
associative and you think well what is
an associative right so if I you know if
you if you talk about commutativity for
example I can't tell whether you put on
your shirt first or your shoes first
because it's it's commutative as to
which order you did it but if you put on
your underwear in a different order then
you put on your pants that'll become
immediately obvious which order you did
it right okay well there's another thing
called associativity and it's almost
everything that we deal with in you know
elementary mathematics is associative
series like why do I learn about
associative a I've never met anything
that isn't associative well the octo
nyan thing associate a number system
that is responsible for most of the
platypi of mathematics if you all things
that just occur anomalously so that's an
example of an invitation out of this
planet you know if you start to think
about the octo nians and care about them
and say are they a message do they have
meaning we can prove that they're there
I construct them for you but they
generate so much bizarreness in some
sort of abstract space how would they
recognize like how how was it how did it
come to be that this is a point of
discussion well there's there's a
process in fact they're two processes
where you can build these number systems
up from each other so you build the
complex from the real you build the
quaternions from the complex you build
the octo nians from the quaternions and
then you can't build anything beyond
that because each time you're giving up
a magical power to get to the next stage
and by the time you get to the octo
nians you're exhausted this is giving
them a magical power well like for
example it's very hard to think about
the square root
negative one so like what does it mean
for something squared to be negative all
right so that's like the complex numbers
gave up that kind of sensibility and
then the complex numbers are at least
commutative a times B equals B times a
but the quaternions don't have that
property so then you have a further
property called associativity so you're
sort of to eat to build the next system
you're giving up properties that sort of
make sense to us and by the time you've
gotten to the Act onehans you've given
everything away there's no way you're
gonna build the next system okay but yet
it's real yes yet it's real in in us in
a very real mathematical sense so does
it just highlight our lack of
understanding yeah and it is a call to
adventure it's like a message from
something that isn't human I'm not gonna
say that it's God I'm not gonna say that
it's logic or design but it's a more
complex it's some of the universe that's
right and you have to uncover that these
things are there or for example you know
C elegans I don't know if you've like
played with do you know about C elegans
no all right
CLU C elegans C letter uh-huh elegans
and L again elegans I think it's okay so
it's this worm that was chosen by this
guy Sydney Brenner who just died and
it's a shame because he would have been
a great podcast guest just like one of
the most brilliant biologists that we
didn't focus on and he said you know
what we're missing a species that we can
completely describe soup-to-nuts here's
the one that's about the simplest thing
with a brain it's only got a thousand
cells and 300 of those cells make up a
very primitive neural system and we're
gonna track where every goddamn cell
like bring up Jamie if I could ask you
something
to bring up the cell lineage diagram for
C elegans so this would be the first of
two images well that is a complete map
of how one fertilized egg becomes a tiny
microscopic worm for every possible
division what the fuck am i look in
there
I love when you say that that is so wild
yeah right now here's the thing everyone
in biology knows how cool this thing is
and very few people not enough people
outside of biology know that we have
completely mapped how one cell like if
you're thirty trillion cells around it's
too big to write a diagram it's only
possible because they're only a thousand
cells and this thing has local motion it
has sexual reproduction you know it eats
so you're looking at the architectural
plans for an actual organism and Jamie
when we're done with that if I could
trouble you for the for the folks that
are just falling apart for a moment for
the folks that are following at home
listening just listening not watching
what we're looking at
Jamie explained how someone could see
this image if they want to give
themselves the letter C it's not not see
like the ocean C elegans and then that
cell lineage it looks like a really long
basketball bracket yeah pushed out
forever
that's a good way to describe it yeah so
it's fucking wild yeah talk about March
Madness it just doesn't stop if we could
bring up the wiring diagram or adjacency
matrix yeah let's see elegans wire
orient it all right yeah perfect that is
a complete map of the 300 neurons in the
C elegans worm how they are wired to
each other like that is a map of the
mind of the worm Wow okay so that's the
portal
that's another portal here's an organism
which is completely mapped and has
complex behaviors it has I think about
half the number of adult cell types that
you and I have so maybe we have like 250
like only 250 different kinds of adult
cells more or less I don't want to get
too precise about that
and yet we are like 10 trillion or 30
trillion copies of those tiny number of
different types of cells well I think
the C elegans has about a hundred and
twenty-five or something like that
different cell types and it only has a
thousand cells and it's able to do most
of what we're able to do we move around
we eat we have sex pretty simple life do
you think it's ever possible well I'm
sure it's probably possible but do you
think in our lifetime we'll ever see a
map like that of a human organism I
don't think so but the cool thing is we
have this map and we still don't
understand it like we've got this thing
dead to rights mmm we've got it boxed in
and it can't we know every single cell
what it does we have all the wirings
between the neurons we still don't get
it right right so like imagine that
you're eight years yeah well what did
what a genius this guy Sydney Brenner
was for choosing this organism mm-hmm
right because this organism is the
simplest place to look at complex life
mmm this image of the reconstructed
biological neural networks what like
you're looking okay now we could have a
discussion about some weird Peruvian
structure and whether we've been visited
mmm and I'm be up for that
look it's not gonna pretend that I'm too
good for it but I know that this is real
right I don't have any doubt I'm not
gonna sit around asking well do you
believe that you know aliens talk to the
federal government in the 40s right that
might as well be an alien yeah
and it's an invitation to adventure yeah
and we are destroying I mean you know
getting just getting back to it the
reason that I'm fighting through culture
war issues which are not very
interesting to me is that we are
destroying the thing that has the
ability to make sense of the world right
it's really did the design and logic
yeah I mean like the ability to say no
you know you come with an experiment
that failed you know and you say I think
it succeeded I say
no it didn't it failed and you say well
I actually am Cambodian and I think
you're discriminating against me because
I'm Cambodian like look your experiment
failed it has nothing to do Cambodia
hmm yeah serious I and you keep that
stuff out of my lab I mean if you watch
your war stuff yes
really what I'm animated by is get your
fucking social engineering out of my
laboratory you've got ten minutes and
I'm calling security that's my issue
it's not telling people how to behave or
that I have all the answers or that we
need to be objective in our lives and
that we just want to have sensible
discussions it's you're coming after
core reality and our ability to make
sense of the world and so I'm happy to
entertain all sorts of things you take
one foot step one foot in my lab and I'm
calling security and if I can't do that
if I can't maintain a scientific journal
or a university in which the bullshit
departments do not invade the
departments that are actually doing the
super important work we're lost and
there is a distinction I mean this
distinction needs to be made there there
is a distinction between hard science
and Gender Studies if you could pull up
Jamie let's do the anomalous magnetic
moment of the electron oh you can do
that yeah you went all Sean Connery on
me well raise the eyebrows yeah one
eyebrow isn't that like a genetic thing
like you can curl your tongue like yeah
I could yeah some people can't do that a
prime trade over we mean turn up some no
no I can't do that
all right you got one thing I got
another okay this is very mature Joe
yeah um a little bit what is it going on
here um put signal where I'm looking for
a number with like 10 or 11 significant
digits we are able to do calculations in
quantum electrodynamics let's say a
quantum field theory
in which we can figure out the precision
of some thing we can predict it to like
10 or 11 decimal places of accuracy and
when I look at the achievement that was
necessary to have theory agree with
experiment to that level and then I
listen to some of the discussions about
well just take these hoaxes about you
know somebody has submitted
parts of mine comp to it you know as
with Jews rewritten as men people right
now those two subjects are taking place
in the same institution mm-hmm one is
incredibly rigorous in demanding and
completely unforgiving and the other
thing is just like frivolous and
nonsense well maybe there's a core of it
that makes sense but there's it's not
going to get anywhere close to the
achievements of the of the hard sciences
but the core of it whether or not it
makes sense the the real problem is the
motivation for doing it in the first
place well the real motivation may be
activism but Activision activism and
scholarship aren't I mean there's so
many things that I want to be true that
just aren't I want beautiful I mean like
you know nature you spend time in nature
you want to think you know like nature's
a community anymore the forest is a
bunch of different organisms all working
together
no it's read of tooth and claw
everything that you think about universe
that is purely beautiful an aspirational
is contradicted by some system in nature
and that's why evolutionary theory was
the first thing on the chopping block
it's just like well this contradicts
everything we want to claim about
organism well tough luck I feel like
there's a way to define this clearly
that makes people understand it better
okay and I don't I don't know if I'm the
guy to do it
but I feel like someone there's a this
is an incredibly complex issue right
where you're dealing with emotions and
feelings and people who feel like
there's unjustice in the world and
inequality they focus on those things to
the point where they're almost
participating in social engineering
by ignoring reality and focusing on what
they want to be true in sort of this way
of reimagining the world and they're
also demanding compliance this is a big
part of this whole right that's going on
here then on the other hand you've got
this stuff yeah these hard sciences that
demand just wriggle is rigorous
intellectual debate they demand careful
study of the facts they demand a deep
understanding of complex mathematics in
order to achieve these results and to be
able to verify them and they're
unforgiving unforgiving yeah there's
just they're two totally different
things and and what you're saying is
when one of them that is this sort of
fervor frivolous airy kind of utopian
version of what they like the future to
be and that interferes right where they
want a certain amount of diverse people
all not a half and I'm not even saying
that it's frivolous I'm not even saying
it's not scholarship I'm saying that
whatever it is I don't care maybe it's
maybe it's some beautiful social thing
well do you do but then they'll hit you
with you don't care because you're a
white male and you have white male
privilege and I don't and what I realize
is is that it's important in as
inclusion is exclusion is equally
important and the instant you say that I
don't know you the time of day what does
that mean by exclusion well we important
we keep talking about diversity and
inclusion diversity inclusion inclusion
and there's an implicit threat in that
which is what makes it really juicy and
interesting which is like well let's
look at us we got three white guys in
here there's Jamie you and me sake speak
to yourself I'm 1.6 percent African I
did recognize that I knew who was good I
knew he was gonna play that card but you
sir can pass his white right yes okay
now in order to have the objection like
there's some little bit of guilt which
is like well why aren't there any people
from Cambodia in here is that that we're
really anti Cambodian if you carry that
guilt
you're always worried that you have to
be able to prove that you're inclusive
it doesn't matter right right okay
it is also important to exclude certain
voices from the conversation so the
voice that plays the card which says
well you're only saying that because X I
don't have to listen to that voice and I
think this is really important that is
not a voice that needs to be answered
it's not a voice that needs to be taken
seriously or paid attention to unless
there's some serious allegation that
there has been some kind of
discrimination or inclusion the burden
of proof is on you for saying why that's
interesting in a particular conversation
the burden is on you to explain why
that's interesting threat well for them
they're trying to engineer a more fair
and balanced society if I was going to
take their perspective they would say
that the reason why there aren't more
women in science or trans people in
science or you know I'm also trying to
engineer a world where there are more
women in science how are you doing that
by trying to figure out what is it
that's selecting against women for
example that we need to get women more
money as I said on this program earlier
in their lives so they can hire help to
help raise their children so they can
spend more time on their careers and
balance yeah but a lot of women don't
find that attractive they don't want to
do that maybe but I'm trying to think
that my point is is that there are lots
of reasons that men and women are
different right yeah so for example I
saw a beautiful video of a guy who jumps
down an enormous flight of stairs on a
skateboard and he just nailed the
landing and it's just a that's a thing
of art and then it shows you 150
attempts where this guy just abused his
body and you know failed and failed
maybe broke a tooth you know blood
everywhere
and you're thinking oh you showed me the
success and you didn't show me that this
guy was willing to put his brain his
life on the
in order to nail that trick and he's
actually one of the world's falling
champions right mm-hmm okay well when
you start saying well why are you
putting this video of this person who's
doing this thing you know on the
internet because that person belongs to
a privileged class I'm saying well I
don't know that guy
abused himself and put himself at risk
and you know devoted his life in a
singular way that no sensible primary
would be I would be appalled if my son
did that I'd be furious with it you know
there are things that are that are
happening that result in imbalances that
aren't about some kind of unfairness and
I think it's very important to say that
unfairness is real and structural
problems are real and non structural
problems and things that really aren't
unfair are also real I think we both
agreed that it's important for people to
have the opportunity to pursue what they
enjoy pursuing I think there's also an
issue where we want people to be more
represented we want more of that that
kind of person that's interested in
something when they might not
necessarily naturally gravitate towards
it and it might not be that there's some
impediments and that there's some
boundaries and some some sort of boys
club that keeps them out and it might be
more that they're just not that
interested in that well that they're
also biologically Bennet that's been
proven in studies but I'm trying to make
it a different point right okay to me
what I'm trying to say is I made a
mistake years ago I think of engaging
and answering this point which is you
know let's it let's take piano
competitions why our piano competitions
historically disproportionately you know
let's say entered in won by Russians or
chess or who knows what
well Russians are beasts in the way that
they destroy children on their way to
the concert stage they will do things
that most American families will not do
to produce a concert pianist okay that's
not an unfairness for the rest of us I
mean I play the piano I can't get on
stage with these guys because they're
just amazing it's not it's not an
unfairness that
right I'm not represented on that stage
you know if I told you that my intention
is to become the world's greatest
jujitsu expert at age 53 being
overweight and not having any history in
combat sports you know and I know that
it's not going to happen with the right
amount of drugs come on Joe and
engineering we can do miraculous thing
that's true we can make him better than
he was
yeah we need daily stem cells we're
gonna we're gonna have to do some real
we're gonna take a chance on cancer and
all sorts of other diseases bright we
can we can achieve some things okay but
the previous conversation that we're
young that you need to develop you need
to develop it needs to be a part of your
well here's the thing that I would say
about striking sports right striking
sports are probably one of the more
interesting ones in that when you start
out at an early age your body develops
learning a strike when it's a gigantic
advantage over someone who learns once
they're there past puberty when you get
someone who's learning how to strike and
they're in their 20s it takes a real
outlier to become super successful it's
very very rare but I remember being in a
fistfight and throwing a punch and not
connecting and hurting my arm
oh I didn't understand if you it's not
free you know it's like a very it's a
very expensive got this your left arm
and you got a really pissed off person
across from you what I was getting back
to is I wanted to talk about in part the
portal and how it relates to the whole
sort of weird social justice thing the
key point is I'm not that interested in
the culture wars I'm interested in the
pipeline of amazing stuff that is
unforgiving right but don't you think
that along the way you have to kind of
address that the culture wars are a
thing try to figure out why they're a
thing trying to figure out what what are
the main points and main factors that
are responsible for it being a thing
right and is there a way to mitigate its
impact on progress well this is I'm
concerned that the cult
wars are going to keep girls black
people whoever short people I don't know
what out of the things that they want to
do why because we're not being honest
about what it actually what is involved
in selecting against people so you
brought up the issue of interests so
like the Google memo the James d'amour
issue right for you this is a great
example publicly ok but my wife went on
Dave Rubens show and she you know look
this is a woman who brought techniques
of gauge field theory into economics so
she's she's no slouch when it comes to
analytic thinking she's a mage field
theory similar to gauge symmetry that
gauge Theory ok just call it gauge
Theory and she wasn't she wasn't doing
she wasn't doing quantum theory but she
was taking she she her thesis brought
techniques of bundle theory like the
hopf fibration that we had and showed
the economics without any alteration was
a mature geometric system and engaged
theoretic idiom so I didn't S&E we
collaborated on on showing that you
can't accommodate changing preferences
in economics without gauge Theory so
that was kind of pretty amazing it was
really great great fun the she her point
was I didn't enjoy the unpleasantness of
focusing on these things because they
were so abstract and so I wanted you
know I was interested in people I was
interested in making sure that our
models could capture human dynamics
better and you know I was just really
excited by the the collaboration we were
doing which was you know she she and I
came from two different worlds and we
found this bridge between them so she
went in Dave Rubin and said look it's
not about abilities women are as smart
as men its interests we're not
interested in the same things
necessarily and that should
but when she said it on Dave Rubin show
didn't register anywhere then date then
James d'amour said it and like the world
freaks how'd Brier if that's also
because he said it within the
environment of Google he just wasn't on
the podcast if he just said but if he
had said that same exact thing and he
was an employee of Google and he was on
a podcast even it was a popular podcast
I don't think you would have created it
was also Spector mean it was the fact
that and the fact that you can get paid
for these you know these weird sort of
spectrum II skills yeah you know guilty
that's what I care about I really enjoy
doing isolated things in the absence of
other people that have a very technical
nature to them and you know my
experience in general is that I you know
I've had female collaborators in very
technical subjects fewer women are
interested in things that involve
isolation and technical things removed
from human interaction and so that
statement will undoubtedly cause a
flurry of activity and if a if a person
says that who's not suspected of trying
to keep women out of something like my
point is I want a much more equal world
but we have a very different diagnosis
as to why the world is as unequal as it
is and your diagnosis is that it's
unequal because people have varied
interests and that but also like
something is dumb as kin work in kin
work women take care of sick relatives
children and the elderly at a level that
most men can't be bothered with you know
that's just like yeah I don't care so
you know you've got all of these guys
hyper focused on their career who are
doing the equivalent of jumping down a
flight of stairs on a skateboard you
know maybe it's not healthy and then
you've got another group of people or is
like saying you know I want to have
children
I want to stay home with the kids for a
couple of years because it's really
important in terms of their development
and bonding and all these things and I
say absolutely how do we create a
financial product that gets you money
early in your life when you need
and then you know maybe you pay
something out when you like it's just a
different diagnosis as to what the
problem is it's not all oppression part
of it is resources and financial
products part of it is interests part of
it is the fields being set up in a way
that is biased I do believe in
structural oppression I just don't
believe in the level of structural
oppression or the remedies for
structural oppression like if we don't
we are losing many of the best minds
that are on female shoulders
we just are there's no question about it
in my mind and rather than saying what
do you mean by we're losing them well
they exit the system we they get through
the like let's say b a's and stem
subjects a lot of the men are PhD
programs like let me give a very simple
example from the harvard math department
from years ago i think Harvard had this
weird thing where it would very often
allow one woman in a year to the ph.d
program in mathematics and that person
usually felt isolated and would often
kind of leave the program and then one
year a female who was admitted deferred
so that meant that there were two women
starting the next year and they formed a
support network and they both got
through and then other women came in
after them so it's like oh that's
interesting
we just learned something right if you
if you let women in in pairs maybe
they're gonna do better and then then
maybe three will do better or four will
do better okay I'm totally up for that
kind of a remediation up until we can
build up enough female experience so
that women have role models like it's
really helpful to be able to look at a
senior female researcher and go to her
and say how did you do it you got
married you had kids you had a very
successful career how did you come back
you know one of the things I found I
used to be interested in this problem
and I found that a lot of the women in
the 1950s were very successful in STEM
subjects had a lot of money or their
husbands had stable jobs that allowed
them to use nannies and housekeeping in
order to free themselves from drudgery
well that was an unadvertised feature of
the system because that's not available
to every
that's it it's a feature where financial
privilege actually enabled somebody to
stay in science so you know the issue
isn't a question of inclusion or
exclusion of groups it's a question of
how are you so sure that everything is
structural oppression hmm that's that's
a really weird thing and if you can
launch that objection cheaply if you can
just say I can take any group and say
why is this group have no one in a
wheelchair now I've got to spend 30
minutes explaining that right I don't
want to do it it's not a good enough
objection like if we're gonna make
progress let's actually make progress
that matters rather than making
ourselves feel good why do you think
that this social justice movement has
reached such hysterical levels over the
last decade well a couple things one I
think that certain positions became like
the the failing business of traditional
media meant that it you couldn't
actually employ people at the same level
that you could employ them before so a
lot of people who didn't have huge
opportunity costs entered journalism was
a huge opportunity let's imagine for
example that you're very ideological and
somebody offers you a $50,000 a year job
which allows you to be ideological or
you could take $150,000 a year job and
ideology isn't a large part of the offer
only the ideological people are gonna
give up $100,000 a year for the
privilege of activism hmm so in part
when you have a failing business model
you start select is a system of
selective pressures it's going to start
selecting for very different people so
that's one of the things that's going on
is is that you have very economically
frustrated people because the Silent
Generation started a problem the baby
boomers amplified the hell out of it
Gen X is still waiting to take its place
in society and the Millennials just
don't even see a path through you know
standard careers nobody's putting a
a glass of scotch and their hand in a
cigar in their mouth and saying come
with me kid let me show you how it's
done well isn't it also partly because
the discussion is out there and the
discussion is a very attractive one the
discussion of one of the reasons why you
haven't gotten by in this world is
because of inequality and because of
some sort of systemic racism or systemic
sexism or systemic homophobia or
transphobia and it becomes when you give
people an option to find an excuse yeah
they gravitate towards that we create
safe space right and you coddle yeah and
you make you mean all these pieces are
in places many many moving parts right
and I think all these little pieces are
in place where where we also have these
massive echo chambers because of social
media we have these people that you know
they find ideologically similar heat
beings and they bounce off of each other
but these were all real problems like I
have an intersex friend I was eating
somebody whose indeterminate between
male and female physiologically so okay
let's imagine that they have it some
karyotype XY profile right and that the
developmental process did not produce
unambiguous genitalia okay okay is that
a hermaphrodite
okay just in ourselves okay this is a
person I think of pretty terrific and I
look at all the forms that say
male/female and I just you know my heart
sinks like we're not even in trans here
we're talking about somebody whose
biological card that they were dealt
could have been you could have been me
right and through no no choices at all
this person is being shoehorned into a
paradigm which puts them at an increased
risk of suicide and it breaks my heart
and we should change it we should break
the male-female dichotomy absolutely now
I have a different feeling about trans
but if we solve the issue of intersex
which is not pressuring just accepting
that's some tiny percentage of the
population which is not vanishingly
small it's just not large is neither
unambiguously male and female in terms
of genotype phenotype concordance we
will do most of the work necessary to
take care of our transfer
so we're suffering too right now trans
is a much more rich world because there
are a million different issues taking
place in trans and they're all conflated
you know part of it because of
developmental biology part of it because
gender really in some sense is socially
constructed in a way that like when
people say mathematics is socially
constructed I have to reject it
you know I and I give this example of
like kilts and loonies from Scotland in
India our skirts but they're not female
in those places so you have to learn
about male and female relative to the
codification in your society and the
issues of what are our what are our
obligations to recognize hey this is
really a female mind in a male body
versus this is a regular mind in a
regular body but needs instruction all
of these things are conflated and I was
really hoping that we if you know if we
used intersex as the test case to break
them the binary because the binary is an
oppression there's no question in my
mind about it well how is it an
oppression because it let's imagine that
I let's say I have persistent malaria
inducts syndrome
so I'm phenotypically on the outside
male and I go to my doctor he says hey
you've got a uterus what yeah yeah you
have a uterus okay that's an exotic
situation maybe I want to identify male
you know because the outside equipment
looks male it's a it's a it's a weird
situation maybe the idea is we're
talking about extremely rare
circumstances does that really define it
as being oppressive like what like what
is for for a friend of mine who is in
neither situation yeah it's oppressive
but I mean is it a present some people
are born paralyzed right some people are
born with like serious neurological
diseases that don't allow them to be
motile that's right like what is it
oppressive if people are just recognized
like most people recognize as being able
to walk if there was no category called
dis disabled right okay like or in a
wheelchair okay no category all right
yeah so you've got somebody who's got a
spinal cord injury and you
have people saying alright everybody
walk this way what do you mean you can't
walk get up
why are you lazy that's what it sounds
like to me like it's one thing to
recognize that not everybody is in the
standard category mm-hmm but it's
another thing to hard code
hard code where are you talking about
Java
yes forms yeah the Federals are making a
form there's a binary it says male or
female alright let's imagine it doesn't
say other or prefer not to say okay so
we're just talking about filling out
forms which is how often does that take
place in your life often enough that it
represents oppression well you have to
let me define motion or female
emotionally emotionally I think this is
oppression oppression yeah really isn't
it done under the interests of defining
people simply because for the most part
you're dealing with males and females
and it's sort of most part they're just
trying to figure out what's what for
their statistics yeah but you know again
this is this is fun I'm glad you're
asking me these questions because
usually I have to be on the other side
of this issue and this is really where
my heart is
which is I care about these people and I
know that in every single conservative
society in the world there are
accommodations made for the failure of
simple binaries to accommodate the
population there's no society this I
there's no society is so conservative
that they've sorted the world into male
and female you know the famous example
of in Iran of the Ayatollah making a
fatwa that said it's fine to have gender
reassignment right we have to recognize
that every single population produces
gender sexual ambiguity but it's now
also to get around the idea of
homosexuality being a grievous crime
because like I believe in Iran it's
illegal to have homosexual activity but
you can have gender reassignment so if
you're a gay man you can choose to
become a female that's true but there's
also a thriving gay scene in Tehran you
know do they have to recognize this but
yeah and there are all sorts of
you know that there was a situation in
India where I you know I have more
experience where you would say oh those
two people are confirmed bachelors you
know that they're so dedicated to their
professions that there's no room for
family and they live together right so
like traditional societies have
everybody accommodates homosexuality and
failures of simple gender binaries and
you know I always bring up the example
of Turkish where Turkish doesn't
hard-code the third person singular
pronoun as male or female it just has
one pronoun for both so thank you for
giving me the opportunity to show where
my heart actually has been this entire
time which is I believe this is
oppressive and I don't think that it
oppresses that many people but I believe
that it's an important oppression that
we have to realize that we hard-coded
and that's what generated a lot of the
feelings before we get to trans you can
simply say from the position of intersex
that the world is a richer place than
male and female and people say oh it six
six versus XY is like no it isn't it
just isn't it for the most part is it
for the most part it is so in terms of
it is a it has been an edge case to deal
with but that edge case is important to
me right does the edge case are they are
human beings that are not only then I
actually okay I like people who are
outside of the norms I think that
probably a larger percentage of those
people are going to be more interesting
people because they're forged in the
fire hmm
so it's not just a case that you know do
you want to chase a couple of edge cases
everybody with a really different
experience is more important to me than
everyone with the standard experience I
think we have to keep take care of the
standard case but I'm absolutely
interested in outliers in edge cases so
to get back to the civil line of thought
well that's an important distinction and
what you're saying is very important
because you are in one way someone could
pigeonhole you from your earlier
statement that you're not interested in
a lot of these different studies grievin
studies a lot of these
gender studies or sentiment if they
interfere with hard science which you
are getting particularly the
evolutionary biology you're getting a
lot of interference you got it right and
you're not interested in that but that
does not mean that you're an insensitive
person that's on it shouldn't he was not
interested in the disruption of the the
the acquiring of data and the analysis
of said data I don't think that activism
makes for good advancement well I think
is also a problem with who's the
activist was it and what what age you're
talking about and how idealistic these
people are and what how are they going
back to biology where's their mind at it
how how formed is their mind how narrow
right is their view of what the world is
or should be and their impact you know
what what what's what's significant
about the right but my disagreement
let's give you an idea of where my
energy comes from let's imagine that you
actually believe that males and females
are equally intelligent okay just a fish
Aryan equivalents can I say lol then
you're then what would you be you'd be
fascinated as to why you don't have
males and females and an intellectually
depending in equal numbers and in an in
a demanding occupation so you'd start
saying huh if I already assume that
males and females are equally
intelligent I care about different
categories how much of this is about
fertility how much of this is about kin
work how much of about is of this is
about structural oppression how much of
this is about path dependence you do
some very careful thing in order to
understand your problem and only when
you'd finally understood your problem
would you say okay now I have an idea of
how to remediate it we need a financial
product that transfers money from late
life to early life because the the huge
burden that knocks women out of the stem
pipeline might be that they have to take
care of elderly parents or young kids
bingo now you now you're working in a
totally different idiom because you've
actually come up with a different idea
or for example
if you make if you hard-code like it's
Sean Carroll I think just had a podcast
in which he said something to the effect
of well on the IDW has kind of been too
interested in race and IQ I have never
been interested in racing like you the
only time I became interested in race
and IQ was when I started hearing there
is absolutely no variation between
groups and you know in any kind of
cognitive endowment well certainly there
is in terms of height the ability to
radiate heat melanin content of the skin
ability to absorb sunlight it doesn't
pass the smell test that you could be
able to say that a priori it's just it's
not a scientific type statement it's
something you'd have to investigate so
in that situation am i interested in in
some finding that says that one group is
smarter and other groups are not as
smart do I believe that IQ equal
smartness no I don't believe I Q equals
smartness do I believe that there's no
cultural bias I think there is cultural
bias you know I'm definitely on record
of saying there are ways in which groups
that are said to fare less well in terms
of IQ demonstrate actual intellectual
dominance this is some rich weird area
I've never cared about before the only
reason that it becomes interesting to me
is that suddenly we're making these
incredible proclamations with certainty
like you know you can't say this word or
this is absolutely true and like life
doesn't work like that there's no word
in the English language George Carlin
made this point all the time there are
no bad words there's bad intent yes
they're bad people well isn't it also
the issue being a part of a group same
or I the IDW is too interested in race
and IQ I'm not I'm not who is I mean I'm
really not I don't discuss that at all I
understand but who is interesting how is
discussed it before but he discussed it
with someone who was studying I don't
think Sam cared I think so I felt that
he had Sam felt that charles murray had
been railroaded yeah by him by he sam
harris and then as sam came to
understand what it is
like to have a mob turn on you Sam said
maybe I'm wrong about charles murray and
then Ezra Klein made this really
interesting point in a really unfair way
against Sam which was basically like hey
you don't know what Charles Murray is
he's a hybrid he's not just a social
scientist he's also got an agenda right
is that accurate I think so I have never
read Murray's work but I don't know
enough to say either but deeply
polarizing I think I'll curve the whole
idea about being able to recognize the
differences in jetan and race and IQ
it's like it's a very contentious
subject both analysts of all I mean look
I have to admit that I don't score that
well on certain tests so I have it built
in total skepticism of IQ tests SAT test
a CT tests any kind of test because it's
an unnatural examination not
intelligence it just isn't what is it
it's a proxy like there are people who
think oh it's a really good proxy I've
never met someone who has a really a
high IQ though that I deemed to be
intellectually inferior yeah but I've
met people who don't have very high IQs
who just blow me away yes right well
there's absolutely there's a type of
intelligence that certain people possess
particularly creative intelligence yeah
there's a creative intelligent people
that met might not score well on SAT
test but they're capable of producing
amazing stuff whether it's literature
comedy whatever whatever it is movies
they can make things they can do things
they have a genius in their ability and
that requires some intelligence like
requires some immeasurable - something
that you can't put on a scale well this
is about you know I said to Jordan I
said Jordan Peterson I said I don't
think I have an IQ because the conceit
you have to remember that a priori we
would always have guessed that I
intelligence was many different things
it was a composite of like lots of
different types of intelligence right
the conceit around IQ is you'd think
that was true but guess again there's
essentially one kind of intelligence
there's
one scale it's a surprise oh that's
really surprising
tell me something of the various forms
of intelligence is one of the things
that you call intelligence processing
yes yes process is very important okay I
don't score well on processing in fact I
don't think anyone in my family has ever
scored well what do you mean by
processing as some kind of mechanical
process of how quickly and flawlessly
you can encode information play with it
and get it out you know like if you're a
dyslexic is it let's take spelling lots
of people on Twitter say haha you
misspelled here in fact it's HEA are in
the case that you meant it really just
shows me something about your
intelligence that you can't keep track
of spelling okay
that's your level of thought do you
happen to know how many brilliant people
can't can't spell can't write well also
you don't even thinking you're just
trying to get the word out and even
misstep yeah but like my mind you know
at some point I got sent home I think
because I was asked to draw a chicken in
school and I put two wings in four feet
on it I'm so non-observant like my my
handwriting is sent home yeah something
like this they sent you home I was like
aberrant or you know I was making fun of
the teacher because it was for well you
know famously mrs. buck euro in first
grade sent me out of the class because I
said that the spider wasn't an insect
because it had eight legs and then she
sent you out of class yeah because I was
well you're correct in that case I was
in the case of a chicken I wasn't but
well maybe saw some weird fucking
Chernobyl chickens yeah man turn
Chernobyl chicken chicken Kiev that's
good
that's comedy cold well my point my
point being that if you don't have a
high confidence in net normal metrics
the race and IQ discussion doesn't land
like so to get back to Charles mark yeah
so Charles Murray it is it's hard to say
he wrote the bell curve right I was
either dismissed as being racist or
applauded by people who you would call
white nationalists who trot out his
ideas as
proof right as measurable proof that
certain races are superior and you know
we could discuss the human the online
people who trot those out all the time
and they use it to form these weird
groups of people that love to hear that
right and that smacks of racist so this
is the issue which is you have a
situation in which he appeared to have a
political orientation which is that he
didn't want money spent in certain ways
and he wanted it spent in others there
there was an in political interpretation
of why he wanted that which was maybe
he's a closet racist then there was
facts that will tend to empower people
who are actually racist all right but
let me pause you there sure but then
there's the actual data right now in
examining the actual data if you just
look at the actual data is is it racist
to look at the the real numbers like if
you say Nigerians in particular who are
incredibly industrious and some of the
more successful immigrant groups come
over to America yeah also happen to be
black if you wanted to look at Nigerians
right in terms of like if you wanted to
if you if you if all if you if you
wanted to look at them particularly as a
group be very difficult to be racist
you'd have to say well these are
superior a lot of superior intellects
come from Nigeria they also tried out
the Asian one right that eight like this
one of the weird things that people like
to show that they're not racist right
like look at shows Asians are of a
superior IQ i i i puzzle on that one
that one's puzzling same one because I
think with certain people with certain
males let's just go with males they look
at african-americans and they see
superiority in in certain ways they see
superiority athletically artistically
musically you look at the contributions
of African Americans culturally across
the board in terms of like the real that
the Jimi Hendrix those
Miles Davis speed of thought and
creativity analytic but not just that
also athletically like the fucking
outliers are just so many there's so
many Michael Jordan's Mike Tyson's Sugar
Ray Leonard's there's so many
african-american outliers who are just
extraordinary or in terms of their their
accomplishments right but not that many
asian-americans in that regard so it's
almost like they'll concede like they're
not doing the things that make me
jealous
see I'm saying okay they're not they're
not creating this insane music although
there are a few right but overall
they're not creating these insane
athletic accomplishments that these
white Americans can't keep up with right
so we'll say but look they're superior
intellectually so I can't be racist I'm
pointing out that these Asians who I'm
not jealous of because they don't do the
things that I wish that I could do but
then when it comes to the African
Americans you're they're pointing out
all the things that the African
Americans can do that they can't do
mm-hmm but they're saying all but
they're intellectually inferior well
this is proven I'm not racist I don't
want this to be true but it seems to be
true I say you see them saying it's like
a way of it's a way of suppressing
accomplishment right Wow like almost
mitigating the impact of the the
jealousy that they feel so if you think
about for example first does that make
sense
I think so first of all I just I hate
this top yeah your topic it's a weird
sound but it feels greasy even touching
it well but now we have to write like
this I I feel like my wrong view of it
is if you'd never brought this thing up
we would never have had to deal with it
and I no longer believe that's true
because we have so much inadvertent data
all right like I don't want the data on
chess we have an idea of how many
grandmasters there are and which groups
like male-female Asian black you know
various portions of Europe I don't know
what that data means but I can't stop
the data because it's going to be
generated even if nobody comes up with a
standardized test because it's a game
and it's scored and it has something to
do with
intellectual abilities right on the
other hand I mean I'm a competitive guy
and I you do comedy I do some some
amount of music I can guarantee you that
both of us have had our ass kicked at
some point African Americans who excel
in both of these areas and I don't mean
you know all God's children got rhythm I
mean getting out funk in a competitive
situation you know looking over
somebody's shoulder on the keyboard and
they're thinking so quickly and in so
many dimensions I can't even imagine
what the hell's going on right so
therefore I never had a lot of fear
about it because I you know I'm in close
proximity with somebody who's just
kicking my ass and therefore I thought I
could leave these topics alone I would
never have to deal with it the way in
which that they come up but you know in
a way that is really unpleasant is this
new thing which is that all imbalances
are all structural oppression all right
and which doesn't allow for trade-offs
between groups like fins fins are good
at some things and not good at others
nobody believes in like aunty Finnish
prejudice so we don't think about it
right it's just not a it's not a big
issue for us now Finnish humor how many
Finnish comedians are there no idea
right well how many do you run into it
The Comedy Store that's a bet it's a bad
example because you're dealing with
America America in American comedy and
also you're also dealing with the
highest level of the game it's like you
know the Comedy Store is essentially
like the it's like the Harvard research
labs of stand-up comedy yeah but some
might nobody is worried about auntie
Finnish behavior we're worried that were
prejudiced against certain groups we're
worried that were prejudiced against
Jews we're worried that were prejudiced
against Mexicans against blacks we have
a pretty clean idea of what bigotry we
really still need to worry about right
and we feel guilty about it and that's
why you say it has this kind of Lube
richest quality so that what are you
really up to over there well why are you
looking at that data set all right and
what my comment is is
I don't know how to stop this thing I'm
not excited about it I'm not interested
in it I definitely think that we have to
actually think about the social
implications of all these things but if
you're if your idea is that we're gonna
stop this at the level of data and
analysis I can't afford that I just
can't afford that we need to have
somebody who's able like for example
microcephaly
you've got people with smaller heads
than the rest of us maybe because of the
Zika virus
well is it is it unethical to study what
the cognitive impairment due to
microcephaly is right I don't know I
don't know what to do but I know that I
want to have a very thoughtful
conversation well how can it be how can
it be unethical to study the cognitive
impairment of someone who's it affect
affected by a disease and that could
possibly help fund research help fund
preventive measures what if there's a
correlation with with smaller heads and
cognitive impairment you know and like
what if somebody like let's take mosaic
Down syndrome mosaic Down syndrome
doesn't have the same profile as regular
Down syndrome you get much higher
functioning people right I mean
ultimately we're all souls and we have
to figure out dignity and we have to
figure out some system by which we can
live with this increased level of
knowledge but does examining impairment
right does that really mean that it's a
prejudiced like what if what about an
examining impairment from people who've
been injured should we avoid doing that
because we don't want to be able 'us do
you see what I'm saying not quite
because we're talking about reality
right we're talking about issues if
you're if you're examining someone who
contracted the Zika virus and it led to
them developing a smaller head which is
one of the horrible side effects of that
right it is examining that in some way
some sort of prejudiced it should we
avoid examining we avoid examining it we
might do some damage if we examine it
and publish the findings we might do
dude it I mean there's a saying you
might do damage to the people that are
infected look or Afflick if we don't
begin with an idea that ultimately the
issue is compassion for ourselves and
others and
that a lot of our genetics and our
history predisposes us to bad behavior
now that we're living with each other
like we have to start I mean as
hippie-dippie as the sound we have to
start from a place of love and decency I
I'm here I certainly agree but I think
that we should avoid reality well that's
this is the thing right yeah so now I
have this other thing which is reality
is compassionate in and of itself
remember when HIV was an
equal-opportunity disease and it just
started in the gay community and it's
gonna jump the fire road and it's gonna
be as much a heterosexual problem as it
was a homosexual problem that turned out
not to be true it was an ideological
statement that didn't look at the
differences between different kinds of
epithelium and different sexual
practices between gays and straights it
was a it was a an activist position that
started to compete with a
epidemiological position or a biological
position and so historically what we did
is we had private expert communication
and it's not always clear that you can
trust your experts it's not always clear
that you should start with the data what
if the data says terrible things like
maybe the data on people with
microcephaly says something and you have
got a person who's going to be judged by
the size of their head which is visibly
off from the rest of their body you know
we we haven't taken up the challenge of
our time which is oK we've got a lot
more information than we wanted and we
have a lot more ability to analyze it
and we know something about ourselves we
know that we have got bigotry is part of
our our makeup and we know that we're
not really good at certain ways of
integrating information and not you know
becoming triumphalist and jerkish about
it and taking victory laps as if it's a
competition like my group's better than
your group right so that's where we're
stuck now I want to be struggling with
other people or saying look I don't know
what the answers are I don't think you
know as I brought up before I don't
think East Africans are cheating in the
Boston Marathon because they've come to
dominate it just because you know
suddenly you had a diverse group of
people replaced by a very tiny group
from Ethiopia and Kenya we are we are
behaving
as you would expect when compassionate
people who recognize that they have been
bigoted and structurally oppressive
encounter data that they can't handle
which the science is giving us more data
than we ever wanted on these things and
we're not answering the challenge of our
time and that's what my issue with
social justice is it's not about I don't
want a better planet or a more inclusive
planet it's like stop crowding out the
really difficult interesting
open-hearted and hard-headed
conversation with this dime-store
nonsense about simple answers and simple
simple truths because those aren't true
and it's not going to work in the long
term I mean I guess that's maybe the
idea is we're competing with social
justice for the rights to try to come up
with a better more equitable future and
the complaint about it isn't you guys
are trying to come up with a better more
equitable future it's what if you're
going to make the same mistake when we
said well the heterosexuals are as much
at risk as the homosexual well that
wasn't true we needed to devote
resources to our homosexual community
and we did need to get the heterosexual
community interested we had a problem
and we needed to think about you know
very thoughtfully we've got an epidemic
that's killing people I think when we're
talking about this I think everything
you're saying resonates and everything
you're saying makes sense
and I think when we're talking about
compassionate compassionate human beings
looking out for each other
right and that this should be something
that we we all this is like one of the
one of our primary concerns whenever we
address any any issue right I think our
problem in this country there's as many
problems but one of our problems is the
loudest voices on the fringes and this
is one of the things that I want to
discuss with you is what's going on in
Portland yeah and I think what's going
on in Portland is the loudest voices on
the fringes that the people on the right
and on the far right and whether
recognises recognizing as emblematic
rather the left they think it defines
the left and I don't think it does and I
think it is it's a symptom of its it's a
symptom of first of all terrible
government of someone who's allowing
this to flourish inside the the mayor of
Portland who seems to be supporting this
in some sort of a weird way weird way
and and ideologically believes that an
Tifa just because of a name stands for
anti-fascist if you had no name which
you would have is a bunch of hood
wearing mask wearing violent thugs who
are eating people who disagree with them
and because that's what we saw with that
Andy how do you say his name go is it I
think it's ending no no and it's NGO
right I treated his silent until
somebody could think I think you're
right what you saw from that video yeah
that anyone could support that of with a
person who's just talking they I mean he
what I've seen of him yeah what they've
tried to describe that he supports
neo-nazis that he supports the proud boy
I have seen none of this I've seen no
evidence of this but I've seen the
narrative trotted out over and over
again as a justification for violence
against him when the left supports
bullying in the worst possible form but
ganging up on someone punching them
hitting them with sticks crowbars
all this crazy shit thinking that it's
okay to throw milkshakes at people
thinking that this is fine
this is nothing if you say what I think
this is a horrible precedent to set and
it's a terrible it's it's a terrible
move if you're playing a game it's a
terrible first move because things only
escalate they don't deescalate no one
says wow you beat the shit out of Andy
this is a mystery right like what the
hell is going on well if the hell's get
you allowing people to wear masks and
carry backpacks with weapons and there's
a natural human inclination when someone
gets hit to jump in and hit them too so
if you see it all the time watch
worldstar go to WorldStarHipHop calm and
watch someone gets hit a bunch of people
just jump in and hit them it happens at
truck stops and fucking high schools it
happens people get brain damage people
dodge each other all the time
people who permanent injury when you're
seeing in Portland
there was one of them where an old guy
got hit in the head with a fucking
crowbar right some mask kid because the
old guy apparently disagreed or they all
disagree on things I don't someone's
Desai guesses that the old guy is not
exactly as portrayed I believe that the
old guy may have been there with a
telescoping baton you know that he was
hitting people let's take this I think
this is so worthwhile but like let's do
it right okay because I think this is so
mysterious what the help are people
doing supporting right and II know being
beaten up on video so let's stay with
him because that's the the best clearest
example of someone who's a tiny little
gay man he's tiny I mean he represents
so many different maligned populations
right he's pretty intersectional yes
he's Asian he's an immigrant he's an
immigrant he's gay is he a Republican I
thought he was left of center yeah I'm
servant of joy well I've been told I'm a
fucking all right guys it's very
confusing all right
he's also diminutive in physical form as
he's not dead he's not threatening
physically right and they've chosen this
guy as an example and one of the more
disturbing things for how many people
saw the video and we're justifying it
saying things like get another hobby
these end are the anti-fascists will not
stand for you know your your your
bigotry and your hate like what are you
talk okay you think it's okay to punch
this guy like the fact that you guys all
piled on and punched him and this is so
sudden I've been thinking a lot about it
I have a model I'm happy to hear yours
because there is a mystery can we both
agree to be at the beginning that you
would imagine that that video would have
shocked people and defines so many
people sort of excusing it is really
shocking
well it's a given that he's also
interested clearly intersection like
yeah you wouldn't predict this from
first principles right no you wouldn't
do we looked at it on paper you
definitely wouldn't especially if if you
allowed him to self-identify as
left-of-center okay so here's how the I
think the model goes okay and unless you
want to give yours first
no bad
the first thing that we have to
understand is that there's a division
and I want to lay this out super
carefully the first division is between
the what you're calling the loudest
voices and I'm going to call the most
courageous call courageous the most
willing to accept loss the voice is most
willing to accept loss most of the left
does not want to be dragged to the
extreme left so you hear this thing
about why are you focusing on a fringe
and the answer is because the fringe is
running the show in my opinion what do
you mean by willing to accept loss if
you go into an ant Aoife versus proud
boys melee you're willing you you accept
that you may get clocked with a bike
lock I don't think that's a good time I
don't think that's correct I think
you're dealing with people that have no
concept of real violence no experience
of real life there was me have you seen
yes it's fucking cosplay its cosplayer
have you seen the image of the guy who's
a suspect looks like he's never worked
out a day in his fucking life looks like
he's never been outside and I think
these people are playing a fucking game
we've agreed on yes okay but you are
willing so you think you're gonna get
into a wily coyote versus the roadrunner
kind of a thing where both of them
always survive to the next card do you
have no idea what they're doing
have you ever seen a fight between
people that have no idea how to fight
yes yeah okay well I've been one of
those okay that stuns me as a martial
arts expert it stuns me that people are
willing to participate in that it's like
me not knowing how to get in a
motorcycle and getting in a race I don't
I don't know how anyone's willing to do
that but they're willing to do that and
they're willing to do that because
they're delusional they're supported in
their delusion of perspective by the
giant numbers of them they all get to
get and then then they wear masks which
further emphasizes this illusion that
there be joke look assume that you are
not even in a physical situation you're
willing to be very loud on social media
about very simplistic perspectives yes
and you're willing to become a pariah
some level because are you though I
think mostly your support are more
support I'm not necessarily your gonna
trigger so many times on this
explanation that I probably just need a
little place in the table to start
building this up and then you can tear
it to hell okay okay
the first believe is is that the belief
that I have is that the fringes are much
more running the show than the people
who claim that this is a small number of
people believe that the fringes are
scary fringes are willing to go places
the rest of us aren't I agree with them
on both sides I left and left and right
so I spend a lot of time focused on the
fringes because the fringes have become
terrifying and the middle has become
cowardly and the whole principle about
the whole idea blue thing was about
creating a non cowardly core that could
actually potentially hold the center
because people are actually fairly
courageous like you would have to say my
brother is fairly courageous ben shapiro
and ii know sam harris these are people
who've stood up to death threats you
know III have a guy who's threatening me
every day of my life you know coming
through the internet and my family you
have to have some courage in order to be
part of this thing and that's more part
of my irritation when people come after
it so there is a cowardly center and a
very terrifying fringe and the fringe is
going around the whole thing right left
and right the next thing is that people
are secretly weirdly sympathetic but
they're violent the violent fringe to
their extreme rather than making common
cause across the center so for example
you imagine that you run a laundromat
and you're being visited by a member of
organized crime every week it comes in
to your laundromat and he kind of plays
with your stuff and he says I'd be shame
if anything happened to your business
and he shakes you down start saying oh
you know I noticed that you have a
daughter I would love to date her
perhaps perhaps we'll go out sometime
you hate this guy
then some sort of violent vigilante
element that's operating extra
judicially after you've gone to the
police over and over again breaks this
guy's kneecaps right you're weirdly
sympathetic with the vigilante because
you're being terrified by a group that
is not being taken care of I think that
this is in part why some elements of the
left that it should be more responsible
that have institutional positions that
have platforms that they can broadcast
are weirdly sympathetic to an Tifa and
why Country Club Republicans are weirdly
sympathetic to some of these far-right
groups is is that they view them as this
is the dangerous group that's kind of
taking care of the problem and I can't
stand up to so you've got this bizarre
cowardly sympathy from the center who
won't actually stand up and say I have
more in common with a country club
Republican and like in my case I view
myself as a progressive or at least a
liberal I have more in common with a
country-club Republican than somebody
who's got a bike lock who's looking for
trouble in a street demonstration trying
to smash up a Starbucks right I don't
want the help from my left now the the
group that wants to play this out using
these sort of proxy groups to handle the
problems is saying look we're gonna
we're gonna sound an airhorn before one
of these things so that all reasonable
people can get the hell out of the way
and if you don't respond then you're
collateral damage and that's on you
that's how they see this I think that's
right so in other words I think and Ino
is the guy who doesn't listen to the
airhorn Bret Weinstein doesn't listen to
the airhorn Jordan Jordan Peterson Sam
Harris don't listen to the airhorn know
that I think that's very accurate new
description of these fringe people doing
the work of the people that are more
reasonable but are happy to have these
bad people do do their work to fight
this battle for them because they think
that ultimately it's for good yeah I
need my organized crime group to get rid
of your organ
yes right and so the idea is that the
law and order people like I really don't
want anybody's organized crime group and
I'm gonna actually stand up to the mob
and I'm actually not gonna pay you your
goddamn protection money because I'm
gonna own a laundromat and this is the
United States of America and fuck off
that's that's the view that I represent
yeah I don't want I don't thank you
auntie if I don't need your help
yeah you know what I actually am much
more afraid of the far-right and the
reason I concentrate my energy on the
far left is what are you trying to do
you're trying to get the genie out of
the bottle on the far right that is the
danger yeah you want to see more tiki
torches it's not tiki torches that you
need to worry about it's armed people
who come and they're not they're not
bringing bike well we're pushing
ordinary human beings to the extremes
Yeah right
and the thing that I get is is that like
I believe that the Republican Party you
know I just I never get a chance to say
this stuff I have never gotten along
with the Republican Party I just don't
like it I view it as the thing that
wants to exclude me from their country
clubs I have an older model they're the
group that wanted to put in condo
developments in Yosemite Valley because
they couldn't figure out why we would
want to preserve the national parks they
were the ones that laughed about
clubbing the baby seals hahaha I just
always had this attitude fuck these
people right this is mine this is my
emotional cadence and we always had this
thing where the Democrats were this we
had most of the smart people and so in a
tiny fraction of time we have seen this
giant evaporation of intelligence if not
actually through a lack of courage the
people who represent responsible
left-wing thinking who believe in
structural oppression but don't believe
in the extent claimed you know who want
to keep making progress who want to make
sure that traditionally marginalized
groups are taken care of that we take
our responsibilities but not our guilt
as the reason for trying to make a
better world I'm not paying reparations
for slavery I mean my family came over
here and like what the nineteen teens or
twenties
you know we came from pogroms is anybody
gonna be paying Jews for the pogroms
that am i gonna be get getting Ukrainian
reparation let's not be ridiculous what
do we want civil war do we just want to
open up tear off every band-aid for the
purpose of you know trying to make
everybody as uncomfortable in their skin
as possible what we have is a situation
in which we don't have courageous people
willing to fight for what works we have
a tiny number of people who are animated
by this the reason I'm animated by this
is that I'm trying to keep the pipeline
open for science it's really what
happened to my brother
before it ever happened to him
my brother and I were in this discussion
about what are we going to do to make
sure that there's always a place to do
biology to do mathematics to be able to
weigh you know competing claims and when
you start politicizing everything and
you choose activism over thought and
reason and civility and comity you can
sign yourself to becoming a less great
nation and a you're no longer able to
lead you can't build a world on angry
activism that's trying to go back to a
lily-white nation that will never happen
and you can't enforce like equality of
outcome we don't even want that people
who work their ass off deserve some of
the pleasures of working your ass off
and I don't always want to work my ass
off and I you know Jackie Chan is the
one I always look at that blooper reel
at the end of every Jackie Chan film
tells me he deserves his money I'm never
gonna do that to my body ever
I don't want an equality of outcome with
Jackie Chan if I make some little film
and this guy's risks his life for every
scene it's insane we need to create a
world in which people are excited and
animated about keeping the pipeline of
decent thought compassionate thought
open-hearted thought and rigorous and
unforgiving thought both on the table at
all times and not adulterating
to serve the other I don't want to see
science abused to oppress anybody and I
don't want to see somebody's dime-store
concept of utopia infecting our ability
to make sense of the world those are
those are twin you know twin directives
and this is this is what I'm excited
about we need to get the world excited
about curing disease we need to get the
world excited about cross-pollination of
ideas between different groups we need
to get the world excited about every
group that is sort of marginalized
contains neurons that we are not
accessing right and so you know for
example Asian females make up about a
quarter of the world's population and
very few of the world's Nobel Prizes
we should be getting greedy about how do
we get those Asian female brains into
into our stem labs so that we can have
the fruits of their discoveries people
can't hear this because they've they've
settled on very cheap versions of
progress it's time to get back to real
progress not fake progress how do we do
that I agree with everything you just
said but how do we do that honestly this
is my third time on perhaps the biggest
podcast and in the world I don't know
maybe maybe that's giving you a little
bit too much credit it's not very far
off we're doing that we're trying to
stand up and if people respond and you
know you've given me courage to start a
podcast I got to tell you I did not want
to do this
I brought my producer Jesse Michaels
here I was a pain in the ass to this guy
I did not return his phone calls he
tried to get me to sign contracts I
wouldn't look at them I've started with
this turnkey podcast company called cast
media they put up with me for like eight
or nine months where I dragged my heels
I don't want to be famous I don't want
to be well-known I'm late I know while
I'm sort of well it's looks oh this is
the crazy thing when I get really nuts
yes it's time to leave time to leave
what this planet oh boy listen we can
leave this plan I got something right
no take you to another planet right now
he's joking federal agents let me let me
give you my argument where we going well
we don't know that we can't leave this
planet I love this planet I love this
plant I have a good time here it's my
favorite planet mine too I know but
here's the real reason we started a
clock around 1953 which is when we had
the explosion at bikini and the the
first hydrogen bomb and when we figured
out the double helix and I call this the
twin nuclei problem and it began in 1953
1953 we started a clock it was also the
height of the McCarthy era we do not
have the wisdom to be able to fuse
nuclei and we don't have the wisdom to
be able to investigate the cell it's too
much power
so our wisdom may have increased
slightly maybe it didn't I don't know
but our power is now godlike so our
biological intelligence what our minds
are capable of has not it's it's been
surpassed by our intellectual
achievements in terms of our
technological innovation these things
which well complicated succumb to our
intellects right right like they're much
simpler than we ever imagined to be able
to create something that normally
happens in the Sun on an island in the
Pacific or to be able to rewrite a cell
the way craig Venter did you know a
synthetic biology we are now gods but
for the wisdom mmm and that's a great
quote
we are now gods but for the wisdom
should be the meme picture you make sure
you know God let's keep all of that
that's gonna get you up there someone's
doing this right now I know let's follow
that focus okay sorry okay so that
started this clock and the world's most
serious human beings should be work
the twin nuclei problem what do we do
with new godlike powers given our
history of conflict our history of envy
our history of madness right because we
succumb regularly we are you know I was
born 20 years after the end of World War
two and we all know what really happened
there I mean we're nuts we're absolutely
not capable of this level of
responsibility and so the question that
we have is do we believe that we have a
long-term solution in terms of
increasing our wisdom we should
definitely try it everybody believes
that should work on that problem but if
we don't think that we have the wisdom
to live like this we don't know how much
time we have left but it's probably not
hundreds probably maybe a few hundred
years tops because sooner or later
you're gonna have Boonton like or Trump
like people I mean I'm sorry I would
have a very deep antipathy towards
Donald Trump he's not temperamentally
fit to have the secrets of theoretical
physics at his fingertips he just isn't
and it's imperative to me that he not be
elected in 2020 and that the Democratic
Party wake up and get rid of it's crazy
fringe so that we can buy some time and
it's nice if Alon thinks we can go to
Mars
maybe that will allow a small number of
us to diversify in case we do something
really dumb to the planet but if human
beings are to continue and we are to
continue evolving we need to spread out
there are three rocks that are
inhabitable there's the earth there's
the moon and there's Mars and the moon
has nothing nothing there Mars is pretty
uninteresting to be in blunt I know that
it's beautiful that we send back these
pictures and we've got this one gorgeous
planet that we are clearly not smart
enough to Stuart
we're still having idiotic climate
change debates I mean even if even if
climate science is somewhat junka fired
we should still be taking climate super
seriously because we don't know what
we're doing it's such a complicated
nonlinear system and we're not even
capable of focusing you know like two
seconds later I'll be watching the
Kardashians for sure so what is the
answer well in my opinion we got to
increase the number of pasta
we'll places we can go behind three to
say nothing of Space Station's because
that's not realistic now none of these
things make sense so the first place
that you have to get to is were really
deeply screwed and not because of
apocalyptic cult-like reasons just
because of science just because of 1953
so the only opportunity is if we can
break the Einstein II and speed limit so
far as I know or we can upload into
silicon or we can reboot from
tardigrades like none of these answers
are good so what I've been toying with
since I was 19 was what is the theory
beyond Einstein and that's the thing and
I've been most uncomfortable talking
about although I've been talking about
it more I gave these lectures in 2013
and in May of 2013 in Oxford and I was
appalled by the way in which the world's
physics community responded I mean I was
very scared I'm not a physicist I don't
claim to be but I I felt like I tried to
present what I hoped was a path forward
given that the field was completely
stalled out and this is it physics and
biology led us into the valley of death
and it's now time to try to get out and
people but no please
so what is my responsibility in terms of
the portal what I'm going to try to do
with this podcast has gained the courage
to share whatever ideas I've had about
breaking the speed limit in the form of
I don't think I have the wisdom to
figure out what it means but at least I
have a hope of trying to write the
fundamental rules to figure out our
source code and that was that what that
was the plan which is
what is this place what is the source
code for reality now what was the
response to the physics that went to the
physicists from the physicists that you
found Pauling well there were two
articles that appeared in The Guardian
newspaper or website that talked
breathlessly about what I had done or
what I might have done to call attention
to the lectures that I was giving so
these were the special Simoni lectures
by Richard Dawkins
successor Marcos de Soto who is a
colleague of mine from way back who
found me in New York City I think in
2011-2012 or something like that
working on this theory I called
geometric unity and I was very
uncomfortable
I hadn't really told anybody that I was
working on this theory for all this
years because it's a crazy
you know there's certain stories that
you find in theoretical physics which
are kind of the precursor to madness
where you know somebody thinks that
they've solved some big problem and
they're working in secret you know it's
sort of what happened with Andrew Wiles
and Fermat's Last Theorem which was a
really interesting story because his
first proof of Fermat's Last Theorem
I think was unfixable so he announced a
proof that he had solved like this most
famous problem in mathematics and he
didn't have a proof and then bizarrely
he was under such pressure that he found
another proof and actually pulled it off
so it's like you know hats off to him
it's one of the crazy story but he was
working in secret for seven years and
nobody knew what he was doing so
sometimes these stories work out but he
was a professor at Princeton and very
highly regarded and he had sort of
husbanded seven years worth of work to
pretend that he was releasing papers
when he was actually secretly doing this
thing that would have made him a madman
and in some sense and so this is what I
was trying to do is I was not able to
work on these issues in the string
theory community because the string
theory community was possessed of this
belief that they had found the answer
back in the 80s in 1984 they had what
they thought was a revolution
and the math community doesn't think in
these terms like both of these are very
conservative communities historically
and very focused on following the
leadership of the top people unless
there's a revolution and so I started
working on a different idea to unify the
two branches of physics that appear to
be incompatible that was different than
the string theory idea and different
than the loop quantum gravity idea or
any of the other in your main motivation
was to do this to try to figure out a
more advanced version of space travel
well it wasn't space travel it was we
need the source code like its it might
be safer to go further once you've
unlocked once you've unlocked nuclear
fusion you're pretty much as screwed as
you need to be so then the issue is okay
we know that we're pretty I'm pretty
sure that Einstein's theory is not final
because you get these singularities
which I don't associate with ultimate
equations so the black hole singularity
called the Schwarzschild singularity or
the initial singularity that we
associate with the Big Bang I mean like
the Freedman robertson-walker space
times our signs to me that these
equations are incomplete but the big
problem with Einstein is that Einsteins
work was so fundamental that it's like
you can't get in under the ground floor
of Einstein you begin a physics seminar
and you're already immediately in his
world you say let X be a space-time
manifold boom you're already in
relativity so it's almost impossible to
figure out a way to get in at a deeper
level of physics than Einstein's theory
and we know that we have to recover
Einstein's theory because that's been
proven you know to work in all sorts of
situations and then the same thing with
quantum field theory which is why I
talked about you know the anomalous
magnetic moment of the electron so my
idea was that only since the 1970s have
we known that particle theory was based
on geometry we knew that Einstein's
theory I thought use geometry to develop
his theory it was the language
called Romani in geometry but many years
later we found out that Bohr's sort of
quantum and Planck's quantum and in
Einstein's poem as well was based on a
different geometry of the sky charles
eres mom was an Alsatian geometers who
worked with carton and that geometry was
figured out at Stony Brook in New York
by Jim Simons who became the world's
greatest hedge fund manager and CN yang
who was arguably number one and number
two greatest living theoretical
physicist he's now in his 90s and they
figured out that the secret language of
particle theory was also geometry but a
different geometry and so geometric
unity is simply the idea that it's not a
fight between Einstein and Bohr it's the
two parents riemann on whose i work
einstein based relativity and charles
eres mom with this gauge theoretic stuff
that we did and the time before this
which in fact empowers particle theory
and so when do those two geometries
unify its two different geometric
theories and well i found that in
general they don't unify in a way that
you want you don't have the ability to
do
Einstein Ian tensor analysis where you
compress something called the Riemann
curvature tensor and the gauge stuff
where you do this gauge symmetry that we
were talking about because gauge
symmetry ruins the ability to compress
the Einstein tensor never mind what that
means but in one or two rare
circumstances you can actually combine
the two geometries and that's where I
think we are and so partially what the
purpose of the portal podcast is is to
use you know I'll just sort of tear the
mask off a little bit we've been talking
about lots of interesting things about
social justice about mathematics about
wonder about psychedelics and trying to
be decent human beings to each other and
to set an example and I think it's been
partially a success in partial
failure but what I'm trying to do is to
gain the courage to talk about what
these ideas are and the worst comes to
worst is is that I wasted a lot of my
life on a crazy theory that turned out
not to be true
what was the response though like how
did the physicists react and what was
what was disappointing about it
so the articles engendered a an immune
reaction immune yeah it's an immune
response ok ok so somebody's giving a
lecture and now how many times have we
heard before the next Einstein yada yada
yada yada and I totally understand this
it's a reasonable reaction like Sean
Carroll had this reaction he referred to
me as a backyard Einstein and his wife
hits him twice today yeah he's on my
mind and his wife wrote wrote this
amazing article in Scientific American
called dear Guardian you've been played
now she's not a physicist but she has
access to Shawn's brain and she writes
on physics and then there was this whole
thing where the new scientist said ok
this guy claimed to give this lecture in
the physics department but he hasn't
written a paper and he didn't tell the
physicists so it was a sneak attack well
of course that wasn't true there there
was announcement of the talk I stayed in
England and I gave the talk once more
and then at a final time a week later
and by that point all sorts of people
from Cambridge and Oxford came to the
talk because it was a worldwide topic of
discussion what the hell's going on and
I gave a two-hour talk consider that
nobody nobody outside of theoretical
physics gives talks on physics it's like
North Korea they don't get many visitors
right to the extent that they get
visitors they do get visitors from
mathematics but in general
mathematicians don't take an interest in
the real physical world and to be blunt
about it I don't think that the string
theorists are very focused on the real
physical world either
they've been playing with toy models for
you know nearly 40 years
so a lot of it was playing out in the
press and the New Scientist had to
retract I said no what we wrote wasn't
true they did publicize the talk and
then there was a an article II sent a
reporter to the final talk that I gave
and the reporter did not know any
physics so I spent the morning with this
person teaching him what the Dirac
equation was like a very fundamental
thing and question came up in the talk
about is your is your model anomaly free
and my model is has a property called
non chirality chirality which is the
difference between the left-right
asymmetric models are called chiral and
left-right symmetric models are called
non chiral so my model is non chiral but
the chiral nature of the universe is
supposed to emerge from it and I was
asked questions that didn't seem to make
sense which is you can't have a chiral
anomaly in a non chiral model and the
person in the reporter picked up on this
and didn't really get it so there was
like a flurry of activity with a big WTF
and if you if you ask me by the time I
gave the second lecture people weren't
laughing
it was a serious lecture people heard
that it was it was in the light he
wasn't like somebody come up with their
own language in their own you know
written in crayon and some
indecipherable thing it was it was
written in the normal language but I
hadn't written a paper and papers are
very much the stock and trade of that
community so I would say that the the
community settled on a rubric which is
paper or it didn't happen in other words
put up or shut up give us a paper no I
had written something but because my
trajectory through this through math and
physics was very unusual I have a very
low trust of the academic community I
support them as you can tell you know
I'm extolling the the virtues of science
but I was subjected to a situation in
graduate school where I had I'm probably
the only person you've ever met with a
PhD who is not allowed to
and his own thesis defense why is that I
don't know what was your thesis it was
on self-dual equations not being as
peculiar to dimension for as was claimed
but I had a situation in which the
thesis when I mean when I had entered
grad school was something that you would
present to the world and by the time I
was trying to leave it was a closed-door
affair where the department would
appoint the person for you and I was in
the unusual position of not having a
thesis advisor so there's some very
fraught story one thing you'll find is
that graduate school for some subclass
of people becomes an extremely fraught
experience where the power of a
department not to grant you a degree or
not to help you get a job or to expel
you becomes very contentious right and
that was the situation so I got into a
very contentious situation but there was
no explanation of why was so contention
so we can talk about it on it okay on
another podcast but I was in a very low
trust situation with with Harvard and
with the standard community and so when
work that I had done that was rejected
for my thesis was discovered by others
in 1994 and revolutionized topological
gauge theory I became very sort of
sullen and angry and withdrawn because
my department knew that I had put
forward the same equations that became
revolutionary in mathematical gauge
theory did you revisit it with them
there was a seminar where a guy named
David Kazdin
who I very much admire the person who
had been my adviser I don't want to name
names had given a seminar saying all of
gauge theory has been revolutionized old
gauge theory is dead and there's a new
gauge theory and
it caused on who I will name said I was
in the back center row I think I was
picking my nose actually and he said
didn't we have a student who told us to
look at these equations and suddenly the
whole room turned around and looked at
me I think this is in room 507 of the
Harvard Science Center and it's just
like you know try to imagine you're
you're an anonymous person in a lecture
and suddenly everyone is staring at you
and your fingers in your nose and that
was the moment and I think I mumbled
something just to get out of it but I
was angry I was angry that they'd taken
away my agency I would you know better
better not to give me a PhD better just
to say look we're gonna go short you
screw off you don't get a PhD and then
if I end up doing something screw you
you know that would have been a better
outcome so instead I got a PhD through a
very tortuous situation and I came to
give up on academics I don't think that
they're a fair system I don't think that
it's open-minded I don't think that they
welcomed all sorts of different belief
structures which are capable of
producing innovations so you know for my
money I've been very vocal about this
I've written articles and edge title
work and I've said theoretical physics
is stalled and you've been claiming that
you're gonna ship string string theory
and since 1984 well where is it
and it's always you know n years away
now what was the premise of Sean
Carroll's wife's article that they got
played well Jamie can you bring it up I
had broken the rules the rules yeah
you're supposed to submit a paper the
paper is supposed to be reviewed it's
supposed to appear in a journal you're
not supposed to be doing this from
mathematics you don't have training as a
physicist this is a hoax but it's on
house well I don't know I mean if it is
a hoax its unclearly not a hoax
you're not hoaxing anyone I'm not trying
to so I don't understand because the
Adyar time okay imagine that you're the
you're the Princeton Physics Department
you probably have a cork board on the
wall called the crank the crank board
and every week somebody writes to you
and says I figured out pipette
perpetual-motion mm-hmm I have a laser
transport device all right and so
everybody is concerned and frightened
that their time is going to be wasted by
lunatics now
I both fit the lunatic profile and don't
fit the lunatic profile on the lunatics
side I'm outside of the system I haven't
kept up I'm not particularly
mathematically minded I mean in fact I'm
a sort of a be math student from high
school so it's kind of a I'm the only
person I know with my profile with a PhD
in math and on the non lunatic side
I mean look you've been listening to my
crazy ideas for a while and they're all
over the world I have lots of heterodox
ideas I don't think that they're taken
as being insane and I don't think this
isn't saying that's been looked at by
enough people to say we until you
actually write it down very cleanly and
clearly we can't fully evaluate it but
it's a it's a gamble and the worst thing
that can happen is is that I have
something that looks like a final theory
that turns out not to be are you gonna
write it out it's already mostly written
up I'm in a different phase i felt that
i got rolld in an alley so here's here's
the big here's the big reveal
okay it's gonna be a lot harder to roll
me I can roll myself I can screw this
thing up just fine by myself but the
opportunity to take me into a quiet
corner and make something disappear or
to hand the credit to somebody else is
gonna be a lot harder to do it's not
gonna happen did you find it
dear guardian you've been played I love
when they use like contemporary slime
it's so good so bitchy yeah you love a
bitchy when it's a girl
what one girl writes it I don't I don't
care I think I mean look it's only like
the future of the number of people been
privately asking me about the recent
Guardian article and accompanying an
op-ed by Oxford mathematician Marcos
Deus how do you say it so - Marcos de
Soto a dis so toy gushing over suppose
supposedly revolutionary you new unified
theory of physics by a man who
officially left academia 20 years ago or
as I've taken to calling it the Eric
Weinstein's amazing new theory that
solves everything puzzling conundrum in
theoretical physics only he hasn't
written an actual but all these are
capital letters that's why I'm saying it
this way nevertheless an actual paper
yet so physicists can't check all those
hard mathematical details but trust us
it's gonna be awesome
while that's super bitchy ahem you let
me say yeah I can say I can say whatever
the fuck I want
ahem with a period first a couple of
caveats I've met Weinstein he's a nice
guy he's wicked smart this is a stupid
article because you know better well
it's just the way it's written it's just
it's yummy Haddie yeah it's for clear
yeah clearly yeah ok but we could go
she's playing after she's playing
enforcer yes you broke the rules yeah we
know why you broke the rules
there's fame and fortune for you and you
think that's what it is that well or
you're delusional what's her motivation
for writing this article oh that's
what's weird
well she's a physics look she she comes
from
I think she's approached protege of
Casey Cole the great physics writer from
who's not a physicist in her defense
yeah do you feel that she felt this
honestly and that this was problematic
in in her eyes that you were entering
into this field that you had not written
a paper and you had left academia 20
years ago and that she was like this is
all nonsense ok I'm gonna put a stop to
this nonsense and I'm gonna do it with
sort of contempor
language and and and slang I don't like
the bitchiness but it's I understand the
motivation mm-hmm look I think the
bitchiness is to make the article more
entertaining and more it's part of our
but was part of her style as a writer
okay and I actually met her as she says
and I had a very high and positive
impression of her so why do you think
she wrote this without discussing you
know it looked Shawn is also one of
these people who's trying to enforce the
rules he didn't have the easiest time I
think he didn't get tenure at Caltech
he's kind of a stickler for reality he's
on the one hand talking total nonsense
about Boltzmann brains and thought
experiments which is what I associate
with desperation physics on the other
hand he's kind of this rigorous
rationalist thinker who's an you know a
prominent atheist so he's a complicated
guy he's a great explainer he's got his
own sort of economic incentives that
he's one of the very few people who sort
of a voice of physics to the world and
they you know operate in some sense as a
couple and there's a richness to this
like you know my my point isn't to run
them down or to boost them up it's just
people are playing at their roles and
ever anyone has a sentence that consists
of one word and that word is ahem yes I
did not enjoy their wrinkle by him but
look yeah but she's trying to throw me a
bone he's wicked smart he's a nice guy
our buddies but he's delusional
yes he's delusional and to the extent
that I've been delusional before I'm
about the only person in the US who's
against high-skilled immigration because
people think why should we keep out the
best in the brightest that's complicated
story I before the financial crisis I
was saying mortgage-backed securities
may blow up the world if you like are
you kidding it's the Great Moderation we
banished volatility people have a chance
to know me now they know that I can get
way out remember I said this is the
beginning I get way out there yeah ok I
think Elan Munz musk is totally wrong
about going to Mars Mars is not going to
save us and maybe going to the stars
maybe the IAI will follow us there yadda
yadda yadda but I'm not going to take
this lying down we're in a desperate
situation and if you're not trying
here's the here's the clear thing we
know what nuclear weapons look like in
the fusion air if we are trying to get
off this planet before people are
unleashing gene drives and you know
weaponized anthrax and who knows what
the hell people are going to get up to
as the power of biology and the power of
physics keeps going the power of
information all right at least I'm
trying I think I'm doing a damn sight
better than trying but assume that I
fail completely how crazy is it that
we're not trying to take armor arms
against our new sea of troubles we it's
time to rush the cockpit we've got to
get Trump out of office we've got a
restore sanity to our sense-making we
need newspapers we need fact checkers we
need what is particularly problematic
about Trump being in office that man has
nuclear capabilities and I have zero
confidence in his decision-making and
people imagine that I'm a trump
supportive after I've called him an
existential risk you know and my boss
and good friend Peter Thiel was a
supporter of Trump in the last election
I'm taking my huge risk in how much I
love this guy Peter Thiel and how much
he loves me because I'm putting the
employer-employee relationship at risk
and people say okay you're just a Peter
Thiel tool well nobody is going to take
that kind of risk unless they have real
faith in their friend and I work for a
friend I mean a real friend person who
doesn't cut and run when trouble starts
and I totally disagree with Peter I have
come to understand the Trump I thought
people would understand the Trump danger
and that the Democratic Party would
re-evaluate their situation but they
didn't they tripled and quadrupled down
and that is alarming and so that's
something I very much got wrong about
Trump is that even Trump wasn't enough
of a message to let people know but
Trump cannot have the nuclear codes
because he's not as skilled a regular
enough player he's gonna accomplish a
lot one of the things I said before the
election is is he might be the best and
worst of presidents he might get us a
new North Korea deal because they're
gonna look at him and say this guy's
nuts
who knows what he would do but we we the
technical community created this problem
and we're abdicating our responsibility
by worrying about our egos by worrying
about our reputations I am advocating I
should have turned this theory over to
the theoretical physics community years
ago even if they screwed me over and I'm
too petty and egotistical to want to
give up on it
now I watch them take credit for things
that weren't you know an assigned credit
I don't like the way they work
the theoretical physics community is our
most important community in the world
and it is also a very unpleasant
community and we need to fund them and
we need to let them play
they're dangerous boys for the most part
there are women but in general they're
very unpleasant men they've been
somewhat cowed they are not the same
Cowboys they used to be because they've
been failing for 40 years I should be
sharing stuff I should be writing things
down I have not had the courage to do it
and if I really have the courage of my
convictions I should share this and see
what happens but one thing is I don't
know if it could be weaponized assume
it's right you know I have it this
decision tree assume it's wrong I got
egg on my face it's okay I'll be okay
I worry much more about if it's right
the two things that can go wrong if it's
right is one that could be weaponized
before it becomes useful and two is that
there's no solution in it maybe we
actually are stuck in this place we
never get to go to the stars we can look
at exoplanets and dream but we're stuck
here until we change human behavior
isn't a trip to the Stars just a
relocation of our own yeah we're kicking
the we're kicking the but we need time
in the end time we have not gotten to
the point where we don't even feel the
danger were in we are in so much danger
we haven't had almost anything happened
since 1945 at the scale of world war two
and so we've got magical thinking
between our ears where we
it can't happen here you know this is
the thing that makes me so fucking
furious about screwing around with
Europeans and sovereignty which is
Europe is a dangerous place
Europe has historically a dangerous
place it's been a place for years where
college students can go and take in the
sights but it's a dangerous ethnic
caldron and Jews know this better than
anyone and the one thing that the far
left and the far right agree on is Jews
and it's not in a good way all right so
it is very important we are the Canaries
in the coal mine we feel this stuff
early and things are things are coming
apart the the physical world the world
of Commerce the world of like structural
engineering and building permits is
still okay so far but the intellectual
world that sort of wraps that and keeps
it in check is coming unglued and quite
frankly I don't want to go through that
again we cannot afford another World War
two because World War two won't won't
look like World War two for three yeah
and I don't know maybe it'll look like
information warfare maybe it won't look
anything like a war that we've seen
before but you know the problem is Joe
is that I've got some sort of wildly
tattooed martial artist across for me
I'm some sort of guy who dropped out of
academics years ago and doesn't have a
published paper in this area and I
really literally think maybe it comes
down to you and me
maybe we used to spot guests and some
crazy-ass differential geometry to at
least make a go of it
at least at the minimum excites somebody
to think maybe it's possible to make
progress well what's interesting about
that is what you said is reaching an
astonishing number of years denies this
is why I pushed out
look I've been responsible about this up
until now this is my first really
irresponsible podcast why is it
irresponsible well I don't know maybe
it's egotistical maybe I shouldn't be
talking about this I guarantee you
they're gonna be a lot of people in
physics departments are gonna be pissed
off when this hits yeah but it's your
thoughts
there's nothing irresponsible about your
thoughts well you have to appreciate
that
when you're working as hard as these
guys have and these guys have been
slogging in the salt mines for forever
with no progress in of the type I mean
since the early 70s it's pretty galling
it's pretty galling to hear somebody
talking like this who has the luxury of
an invite to this podcast with no
vetting with you know nothing behind him
other than the hope that maybe he's done
something that's interesting and I've
never spoken about this you know I have
a recording for example of the the
lecture that I did at Oxford which I
chose not to release you know I just
it was so unpleasant like the cattiness
the bitchiness the nastiness the
undercutting the idea that this came
down to ego or Fame I guarantee you the
thing that I really liked least about
what I'm about to do with this podcast
is Fame I think Fame is a bad it's a bad
deal like you you have to deal with this
you don't wanna say what your location
is where you're gonna be
you know people react all day long
people say can you get me into Joe Rogan
can you connect me with Joe Rogan Joe
Rogan Joe Rogan Jurgen it's constant I
get two to three requests a week I don't
want it
I've had a wonderful 53 years without
being very well known and if this
doesn't work out I'll go back to being
very well not very well known but my
greater fears is is that maybe maybe
will work and then the thing that I
really care about is does it get does it
help does it buy us time can we get off
the planet is there anything we can do
if we actually know the source code you
know Jon Brockman runs this thing called
edge org and every year he asked a
question to like 200 scientists and
finally he got tired about asking the
annual question so he said okay is 20
years is enough the last question is
what is the final question and Jamie
could I ask you to bring up edge org and
my name and my answer on must have been
29 2018
and it's interesting because you know I
kept putting stuff out in edge like for
example I was very worried about
professional wrestling priests aging an
election so I did an article on kayfabe
which is the system of Lies that under
undergirds wrestling and I did one on
Bitcoin called go virtual young man so
nobody ever paid attention to my series
of answers to the edge question so this
is the last question the last something
unprecedented happened when we finally
learn our own source code nobody cared
this is the question that obsesses me
this is what I say I've left this planet
is this is what I'm focused on what
happens if we actually figure out where
we are where this place is what are we
doing who are we what built this and who
acts on that information once we do
figure it out what steps are taken I
don't know it's um whether or not the
consequences of those steps are ever
really full you know I always thought I
always tried to talk to somebody like
government or the intelligence services
like I don't know whether I have
something maybe I do maybe I don't but
wouldn't wouldn't wouldn't you guys want
to know ahead of schedule
you know never was able to get anybody
interested I I went through graduate
school on the Office of Naval Research
--is top grant for graduate study and I
always thought they would check in with
me but they never have so like the
federal government paid for my postdoc
and the military paid for my graduate
education and Harvard doesn't care and
they don't nobody cares nobody believes
that anything is possible which is the
really interesting part what do you mean
by not nobody believes anything is upon
you mean really astronomical
breakthroughs yeah like we all know what
we're waiting to see what what Tim Cook
is gonna do for the next iPhone will
Elon get to Mars does anyone actually
care about Mars I I'm I was there for
the moon landings and let me tell you we
were bored of the moon by the time we
left it's a very weird thing to say but
that's something I was born in 1965 we
were bored
well my perception of the whole Mars
things that's the shittiest location
that we can get to
yeah it's a bad name the best note
location that we can get to it isn't
this one well yeah but it's also like we
have spots on earth that suck yeah we
don't even go there we don't even go
there but like at least you know hats
off to Ilan that he at least inspires
people by he followed up the scent when
we gave up on progress right so my point
is we're not nobody thinks this is gonna
work I can say it on the show it can
generate a little bit of flurry of
activity you'll die down within a week
we're gonna go back to you know who got
milkshake right and we're gonna want to
know is Tulsa is Tulsi gaining on Andrew
you know what about Biden can the center
hold
well the fringe come in but we're just
constantly distracted and at least this
is going to be entertaining we are at
three hours and three oh three and a
half hours see last time we almost got
to four hours I'm happy to end it if
people will go to the portal the portal
with Eric Weinstein on on Apple Apple
Spotify Spotify and popular clients for
podcast I'm sure they will this is gonna
be an interesting one I mean it really
curious to see what kind of blowback
this one's gonna well two things Joe one
you along with Sam and my brother really
encouraged me to do this so I'm holding
you personally responsible for whatever
goes wrong the second thing is I really
just I have such a positive feeling
about what you've done in terms of
empowering people like it really touched
me that when my brother was shit out of
luck
you did a bunch of shows with him and
helped him get to a safe place I just
want to say that there is like an aspect
we keep talking about is there any use
for men whatsoever and standing up in a
situation in which you can take a fair
amount of guff you can take a lot of
heat you know you said this thing to me
that was really amazing which is that
this is a Golden Age of comedy and my
interpretation was that there was a
period of time where nobody could figure
out how to tell a joke on a college
campus and our best comedians have
figured out how to be compassionate
enough and kind enough and touch the
things that are animating us and making
us uncomfortable and that that's what
you're a part of and so I've used
Ellicott neurosurg and I watch the
evolution for example of your jokes
about professional wrestling being gay
right now seriously stay with me Joe I
watched that it was always funny but it
got better and better and better and the
idea that that could be told in a way
that you'd be totally comfortable with
you know your gay friend or lover right
next to you laughing your ass off taught
me a lot about the power just radiating
decency that together with analytic
thought and it's a bit of a template I
don't know that I have the skill to pull
this off but you've been an inspiration
I just wanted to say thank you for
having me back on the program my
pleasure my friend it's always a
pleasure thank you all right thank you
bye everybody
that was fucked up
[Applause]
[Music]